IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

5602015

EATDer: Edge-Assisted Adaptive Transformer
Detector for Remote Sensing Change Detection
Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE, Junyi Duan , Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Change detection (CD) is one of the important
research topics in remote sensing (RS) image processing.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have dominated
the RSCD community. Many successful CNN-based models have
been proposed, and they achieved cracking performance. Nevertheless, influenced by the limited receptive field, the CNN-based
models are not good at capturing long-distance context dependencies within RS images, negatively impacting their performance.
With the appearance of the visual transformer, the above problems have been mitigated. However, the high time costs of the
transformer-based models limit their applicability. In addition,
previous CD networks (whether CNN-based or transform-based)
do not pay attention to the edges of changed areas, reducing the
quality of change maps. To overcome the shortcomings discussed
above, we propose a new CD method named edge-assisted
adaptive transformer detector (EATDer). EATDer consists of a
Siamese encoder and an edge-aware decoder. Each branch in the
Siamese encoder encloses three self-adaption vision transformer
(SAVT) blocks, which aim to capture the local and global
information within RS images. Also, two branches are connected
by full-range fusion modules (FRFMs), which focus on mining the
temporal clues among bi-temporal RS images and pointing out
the changed/unchanged messages. The edge-aware decoder first
integrates the multiscale features obtained by the encoder using
a restoring block. Then, it enhances the combined features by
a refining block. Finally, based on the refined features, both the
change and edge detection results can be produced. Along with a
joint loss function, we can get high-quality change maps in which
the changed areas are correct and have clear and smooth edges.
The usefulness of our EATDer is validated by extensive experiments conducted on three popular RSCD datasets. Our source
codes are available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/RemoteSensing-Image-Change-Detection/tree/main/EATDer
Index Terms— Change detection (CD), remote sensing (RS),
transformer.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HANKS to the development of sensor technologies,
a large number of remote sensing (RS) images can be
collected every day. These Earth observation data provide rich
land-cover information for researchers. As a basic and vibrant
interpretation technique, RS change detection (RSCD) plays a
vital role in the RS community. It aims to find the changed

T

Manuscript received 7 February 2023; revised 23 July 2023 and
21 November 2023; accepted 13 December 2023. Date of publication
18 December 2023; date of current version 26 December 2023. This work
was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62171332 and Grant 62276197 and in part by the Shaanxi
Province Innovation Capability Support Plan under Grant 2023-CX-TD-09.
(Corresponding author: Xu Tang.)
The authors are with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding of the Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence,
Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3344083

pixels and regions within the multitemporal RS images, which
cover the same areas but are produced at different times [1],
[2]. The accurate RSCD results contribute to many RS applications, including land-cover analysis [3], object detection [4],
disaster monitoring [5], and scene understanding [6], [7],
[8], [9].
In the past, numerous methods have been developed for
RSCD with the help of traditional machine learning [10],
[11]. Those methods mainly rely on algebra and transformation
techniques. The algebra-based methods, such as change vector
analysis [12], are used to determine the changed pixels by
performing the common algebraic operations on the original
image space. The transformation-based approaches, such as
principal component analysis [13], are habituated to mapping RS images into suitable feature spaces for deciding
the changed areas. Although the above methods are feasible,
their performance cannot meet what we expected due to
the hand-crafted features, which are not able to represent
the complex contents within RS images. For example, the
pseudo variation issues (see Fig. 1) caused by illumination and
shadows are hardly addressed using only the low-level visual
features.
Recently, with the appearance of deep learning, especially
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the results of RSCD
have improved significantly. Benefiting from the stacked structure and hierarchical learning manner, CNNs can explore the
semantic features of RS images. Compared with the handcrafted features, these high-level visual features can fully
express intricate land covers within RS images so that accurate
RSCD maps can be generated [14]. Many CNN-based models
have been proposed, and their performance is cracking [15],
[16]. In the beginning, scholars adopt some existing CNNs to
construct their RSCD models [17]. Then, some RSCD-oriented
CNNs are developed [18] to enhance the performance. With
the help of some advanced technologies, such as Siamese
architecture [19] and attention mechanisms [20], [21], these
RSCD-oriented CNNs promote the RSCD results to a new
level. Despite great successes, the CNN-based RSCD methods
still have an inherent problem, that is, they are not able to
capture the long-range contextual information hidden in RS
images. This shortcoming limits their behavior more or less.
For instance, a set of bi-temporal RS images is shown in
Fig. 2(a) and (b). CNNs can capture local information (e.g.,
“trees,” “cars,” and “buildings”) easily. If we only leverage the
local clues, the generated change map may contain misjudgments (see Fig. 2(c) in the first row, areas in red). If the global
relationships between various local objects can be further

1558-0644 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 1. Two common interference factors of RSCD task. (a) Caused by
illumination. (b) Caused by shadow.

Fig. 2.
Examples of how local and global information influence the
RSCD results. (a) Former RS images. (b) Later RS images. (c) RSCD maps.
CNNs are good at capturing the local land covers. If we only use the local
information, the incorrect RSCD map may be produced. This case is shown
in the first row. If the global relations between different local land covers are
modeled, the correct RSCD map can be generated. This case is displayed in
the second row.

mined, the correct change map can be produced (see Fig. 2(c)
in the second row).
Considering the above limitations, researchers introduce
the transformer [22], [23] into the RS community. Due
to the energetic capacity of long-range knowledge mining,
the transformer has become increasingly popular for RS
image processing. Various transformer-based models have
been developed for different RS tasks [24], [25], as well as
RSCD [26], [27]. Although those transformer-based models
have shown their superiorities, there is still room for improvement, especially for RSCD tasks. First, due to the multihead
self-attention (MSA) mechanism [23], the transformer-based
RSCD models’ time consumption is always high, which
limits their practicality and generalization capability. Second,
the complicated content information and temporal cues of
different RS images are equally important for RSCD tasks.
However, most current transformer-based models focus on the
RS images themselves but ignore the temporal clues between
RS images collected at different times. Third, since the land
covers within RS images are diverse, and their scales are
various, the changed areas among multitemporal RS images
are usually irregular. However, the normal transformer-based
models are not good at exploring the boundaries precisely,
which impacts the RSCD tasks negatively.
To overcome the mentioned shortcomings, we develop a
new encoder–decoder RSCD model named edge-assisted adaptive transformer detector (EATDer). The encoder is a Siamese
network that involves self-adaption vision transformer (SAVT)
blocks and full-range fusion modules (FRFMs). The function
of SAVT blocks is to explore both the local and global information from RS images with relatively low time consumption.

The goals of FRFMs are to mine the invisible temporal
knowledge among different RS images and to emphasize the
changed/unchanged areas. The decoder contains a restoring
block and a refining block. Their targets are to integrate
and enhance the multiscale features obtained from encoders
and produce the change maps. Meanwhile, an auxiliary edge
detection task is added to ensure the decoder is aware of the
edges of changed areas so that the change maps’ quality can
be further enhanced. Our contributions can be summarized as
follows.
1) An encoder–decoder RSCD network (i.e., EATDer) is
developed. Not only the local details and global context
within a single RS image but also the temporal clues
hidden in a series of RS images can be explored by
EATDer. Therefore, promising CD maps can be generated.
2) Instead of adopting the original vision transformer
and its existing variants, we develop an SAVT block
to explore the valuable information from RS images.
To mine the complex local details within RS images,
the common grid patch scheme used in the original
transformer is replaced by the overlapping embedding
scheme. To reduce computational costs, a self-adaptive
MSA (SAMSA) embedded in self-adaption progress
(SAP) is designed. In this fashion, local and global
messages can be fully captured from RS images with
modest time costs.
3) In addition to focusing on the intricate contents of
RS images, our EATDer also considers the temporal clues among different RS images to address CD
tasks. To this end, we develop a FRFM. Adding it
into the encoder allows helpful information across the
bi-temporal RS images to be exchanged and fused
mutually, and the invisible temporal knowledge among
different RS images can be explored. Therefore, the
changed/unchanged areas among different RS images
can be highlighted.
4) Apart from detecting the changes, we also recognize the edges around the changed areas to enhance
the CD results further. For this purpose, the output
of the decoder is split at the channel dimension to
represent the confidence degrees of the change and edge
information. Also, two sets of edge detection ground
truths are constructed automatically to assist in identifying the edges.
The rest parts of this article are organized as follows.
Section II reviews some literature related to RSCD. Section III
explains our EATDer in detail. The experiments and corresponding discussion are displayed in Section IV. Finally,
a short conclusion is summarized in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. CNN-Based CD Models
Recently, CNN-based methods have dominated the RSCD
community. We roughly divide them into two groups according
to their architecture [28], [29], i.e., single- and dual-branch
models. In the first group, the methods are used to concatenate the bi-temporal RS images to be the input data for

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

the following feature learning and change map generation.
Liu et al. [30] proposed a local restricted CNN (LRCNN)
to deal with PolSAR image CD tasks. LRCNN receives the
combination of the bi-temporal PolSAR images and their
difference maps (DIs). Then, by leveraging regression pretraining and classification fine-tuning, the positive change maps
can be generated in an unsupervised manner. An end-to-end
CNN framework was developed for hyperspectral image (HSI)
CD [31]. Considering the high-dimension properties of HSIs,
the endmember analysis approach is first adopted to mine
cross-channel features and explore multisource information.
Then, the preprocessed HSIs are combined and input into a
specific CNN for the change maps. Another HSI CD network
was presented in [32], in which the self-calibrated convolution
is adopted to enhance the features’ discrimination and reduce
the model’s volume simultaneously. Based on the pseudo
label generation scheme, fuzzy clustering algorithm, and CNN,
a single-branch SAR image CD model was proposed in [33].
The high-confidence samples and their pseudo labels are used
to train CNN, and then the trained CNN is used to produce
the final change maps.
With the help of booming Siamese networks, many
dual-branch models have been proposed for RSCD. In contrast to the single-branch models, the bi-temporal RS images
are fed into two branches individually for the following
steps. Chen et al. [34] proposed a Siamese convolutional
multilayer recurrent neural network (SiamCRNN) for RSCD.
By embedding the CNN and recurrent neural network
(RNN) into a Siamese framework, both the structural and
spatial–spectral information can be explored from multitemporal RS images. Thus, favorable change maps can be
obtained. Similarly, another dual-branch network was developed in [35]. The positive CD results are ensured by the
extracted local-global features and cross-task transfer learning
strategy. Chen et al. [36] designed a dual encoder–encoder network to deal with RSCD tasks, in which the dense connection
scheme and self-supervised learning are integrated to generate
the encouraging change maps. Apart from constructing various
models under the framework of the Siamese networks, some
scholars pay attention to capturing the boundary clues for
improving RSCD results. Bai et al. [37] presented a dualbranch network. Besides the common Siamese feature learning
and difference information extraction, the prior knowledge
of the edge structure is also considered to guarantee the
accuracy of change maps. Lei et al. [38] added a boundary
extraction constraint into the Siamese network to enhance the
discrimination of learned visual features and improve the CD
results.

5602015

RSCD. Chen et al. [42] proposed a bi-temporal image transformer (BIT) to handle the RSCD problem by exploring
the spatial–temporal contexts. BIT first maps RS images
into high-level feature maps using two conventional CNNs.
Then, it adopts a transformer encoder to model the contextual
relations in both spatial and temporal domains. Finally, BIT
leverages two transformer encoders to produce the refined
feature maps, which can be used to decide change maps.
The encouraging results confirm the effectiveness of the transformer in RSCD. By integrating the superiorities of CNN
and transformer, an intrascale cross-interaction and interscale
feature fusion network (ICIF-Net) was developed in [43].
ICIF-Net utilizes a CNN and a transformer to capture diverse
information from bi-temporal RS images. Along with the
intrascale clue interaction and interscale knowledge fusion
strategies, the feature maps rich in local-global messages can
be obtained to produce RSCD results. Li et al. [44] embedded
the transformer into the UNet to develop an encoder–decoder
model for RSCD. The UNet is used to capture the detailed
local information, while the transformer is used to model
the global contextual relations. After combining them, the
positive change maps can be predicted. Considering the
multiscale properties of RS images, a new model named
MTCNet was introduced in [45], in which the conventional
CNN, transformer, multiscale information fusion module, and
block attention module are merged. The reported CD results
demonstrate MTCNet’s usefulness to RSCD.
Although the above methods have succeeded, their computational costs are always high because of the self-attention
mechanism within the original transformer. To mitigate this
problem, the methods within the second class are accustomed
to introducing the variants of the transformer for RSCD
models. Zhang et al. [27] developed a Siamese U-shaped
model to deal with RSCD tasks named SwinSUNet. SwinSUNet consists of two weight-shared encoders, a decoder, and
proper feature fusion/merging schemes. The basic unit within
the encoder and decoder is the Swin transformer (SwinT)
block rather than the common transformer. This way, the
effectiveness and efficiency of SwinSUNet can be ensured.
Bandara and Patel [46] embedded the sequence reduction into
the original transformer so that the time costs of the whole
method can be saved. Wang et al. [47] adopted ViTAE [48] to
complete RSCD tasks. ViTAE’s computational complexity is
lower than the original transformer due to the spatial pyramid
reduction and shiftable window multihead attention. Thus, the
process of RSCD is efficient.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
A. Overall Framework

B. Transformer-Based CD Models
Transformer, proposed in natural language processing [22],
has become popular in the RS community due to its intrinsic
capacity in long-range relations exploration [39], [40], [41].
For RSCD, many transformer-based methods have been proposed, and we broadly divide them into two classes.
The methods within the first-class focus on taking advantage of the original transformer to design new models for

The framework of the proposed EATDer is shown in Fig. 3.
It mainly consists of a Siamese encoder and an edge-aware
decoder. The Siamese encoder has two same networks, and
each of them involves three SAVT blocks to learn valuable
information from bi-temporal RS images with a tolerable computational cost. In addition, two networks are connected by our
FRFM. In this way, not only can the profitable information
corresponding to bi-temporal RS images be transferred, but

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Framework of the proposed EATDer.

part, while the residual connection is adopted after each part.
Therefore, the output of the first SAVT encoder is
PSAMSA
= SAMSA LN P′1
1

+ P′1

Pnew
= MLP LN PSAMSA
+ PSAMSA
1
1
1

Fig. 4.

Architecture of the SAVT block.

also the changed and unchanged clues can be highlighted.
The edge-aware decoder mainly incorporates a restoring block
and a refining block, which aim to integrate knowledge from
various scales and improve the feature maps for CD. In addition, besides generating the change maps, we also estimate
the edges of the changed areas. This way, our EATDer could
accurately capture the edges of changed land covers to enhance
the quality of change maps.
B. Siamese Encoder
This section will explain the Siamese encoder. Before
introducing it in detail, we first clarify the SAVT block and
FRFM.
1) SAVT Block: The goal of the SAVT block is to capture the complex contents within RS images from a global
aspect with an acceptable computational cost. To this end, our
SAVT block is developed based on the original vision transformer [23]. Also, we introduce the overlapping embedding
scheme [46], [49], [50], [51] to explore the local clues hidden
in RS images and remold the MSA mechanism [22], [23] to
reduce computation.
The block architecture is shown in Fig. 4. Suppose the input
of a SAVT block is Fin ∈ Rh×w×c . Considering the complex
and rich local contents within RS images, the overlapping
embedding scheme instead of the grid strategy is adopted
to transform Fin into data patches. Particularly, we pass Fin
through a convolution with c′ kernels to generate a set of data
′
patches P ∈ R(h/s)×(w/s)×c . The sizes, stride, and padding sizes
of c′ kernels are 2s − 1, s, and s − 1. Then, the obtained
data patches will be fed into L SAVT encoders to generate
2
′
the updated patches Pnew ∈ R(hw/s )×c . Finally, the output
′
Fout ∈ R(h/s)×(w/s)×c of the SAVT block can be obtained after
the reshape operation.
Since the L SAVT encoders are the same, we adopt the
first SAVT encoder as an example for description. The SAVT
encoder involves a SAMSA part and a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) part. The layer-norm (LN) layer is added before each



(1)

where P′1 denotes the reshaped data patches P and its size
is (hw/s 2 ) × c′ , LN(·), SAMSA(·) and MLP(·) indicate the
functions of the LN, SAMSA, and MLP layers, and Pnew
∈
1
2
′
R(hw/s )×c means the encoded features. Here, the MLP part
contains two linear transformations and a Gaussian error linear
unit activation. Pnew
would be fed into the second SAVT
1
encoder to generate Pnew
2 . In a similar fashion, we can obtain
the updated patches Pnew after L SAVT encoders.
The SAMSA part mainly contains a SAP and a conventional
MSA. Here, the “self-adaption” in SAP mainly describes
the adaptive spatial size changes of the pending data for
MSA. First, we copy the normalized P′1 to produce pend2
′
2
′
ing data Q1 ∈ R(hw/s )×c , V1 ∈ R(hw/s )×c , and K1 ∈
2
′
R(hw/s )×c . Customarily, the MSA mechanism can be applied
to {Q1 , K1 , V1 } directly. However, the computational costs
would be large. To mitigate this issue, we develop SAP to
reduce the spatial sizes of {K1 , V1 }. For K1 , we reshape it into
′
2-D version K̃1 ∈ R(h/s)×(w/s)×c , and use the√ average
pooling
√
′
and a 1 × 1 convolution to get K̂1 ∈ R⌈ (h/s)⌉×⌈ (w/s)⌉×c .
Here, the average pooling aims to reduce the spatial size,
and the 1 × 1 convolution avoids the information loss. After
the√ reshape operation, we can get the reductive data Ka1 ∈
′
R⌈ hw/s⌉×c . Similarly,
we can obtain the reductive data of
√
′
V1 , i.e., Va1 ∈ R⌈ hw/s⌉×c . Second, the MSA mechanism is
a
a
conducted on {Q1 , K1 , V1 }, which can be formulated as

MSA Q1 , Ka1 , Va1 = concat(head1 , . . . , headn )W O


head j = Attention Q1 W Qj , Ka1 W Kj , Va1 WVj

p 
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax QKT / dk V
(2)
where W O , W Qj , W Kj , and WVj imply the learnable parameter
matrixes, concat(·), Attention(·), and softmax(·) denote√the
concatenation, self-attention, and softmax functions, and dk
indicates a scaling factor with a dk value equals the dimension of K. Compared with the standard MSA, the proposed
SAMSA has lower computational complexity. For the input
′
data P ∈ R(h/s)×(w/s)×c , the time complexities of MSA and

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

5602015

SAMSA are


hw 2 ′
hw ′ 2
c
(MSA) = 4 2 c + 2
s
s2
!
√


hw+s hw ′2
hw 3/2 ′
(SAMSA) = 2
c
+
2
c . (3)
s2
s2
The idea of reducing the computational costs of the transformer by decreasing the feature maps’ spatial sizes can
also be found in pyramid vision transformer (PVT) [52] and
PVT V2 [53]. Here, we summarize the similar and different
points between our SAVT block and the other two models.
The similar point of the three models is that they reduce
the sizes of K and V to whittle down the computational
costs of the original visual transformer. However, the spatial
reduction schemes are different from each other. For clarity,
we use K as an example to explain. Suppose the size of
K is (h/s) × (w/s) × c′ . PVT uses a reshape and a linear
projection to reduce its size with a fixed reduction ratio R.
After this process, the size of the new feature map K′PVT
is (h/s R) × (w/s R) × c′ . PVT V2 leverages the average
pooling to reduce the size of K to P × P × c′ forcibly, where
P < (h/s) and P < (w/s). In other words, the reduced feature
map K′PVTV2 has a size of P × P × c′ . In contrast to the
two schemes above, the reduction strategy in our SAVT block
utilizes average pooling and 1 × 1 convolution operations to
achieve a spatial reduction of K√
in an adaptive
√ way. The size
of the new feature map K′SAP is ⌈ h/s ⌉ × ⌈ w/s ⌉ × c′ . This
way, we do not need to tune the hyper-parameters (R or P)
to control the reduced spatial size. Besides the above point,
another difference is that we add a 1 × 1 convolution after
′
the dimension-reduced K SAP
. This seemingly inconspicuous
operation can help SAVT regularize the information within the
dimension-reduced feature maps. The benefits of our adaptive
spatial reduction scheme and additional 1 × 1 convolution will
be studied in Section IV-E1.
2) Full-Range Fusion Module: The targets of FRFM are
twofold. One is to fuse the information (e.g., complex land
covers and temporal clues) corresponding to the input data
pair mutually. Here, the temporal clues mean the progression
of content changes. The other one is to point out the salient
clues hidden in the input data. To achieve these goals, there
are two submodules in FRFM [see Fig. 5(a)], including a
cross fusion submodule and a convolutional block attention
submodule (CBAM) [54].
The schematic illustration of the cross-fusion submodule
can be found in Fig. 5(b). When input {X, Y} ∈ Rh×w×c to
FRFM, the cross fusion submodule first fuses their messages
and generates {Xcf , Ycf } ∈ Rh×w×c . For X, this process can be
formulated as


 
Q y KTx
cf
X = X + softmax √
Vx WxO
(4)
dkx
√
where WxO indicates a learnable parameter matrix, dkx is a
scaling factor and the value of dkx is the dimension of Kx , Kx
and Vx denote the key and value of X, and Q y implies the
query of Y. Here, the definitions of {Q y , Kx , Vx } are
Q y = YW yQ ,

Kx = XWxK , Vx = XWxV

(5)

Fig. 5. Architecture of the FRFM and cross fusion submodule. (a) FRFM.
(b) Cross fusion submodule.

where W yQ , WxK , and WxV are learnable weights. Similarly, the
cross fusion process for Y is
"
! #
Qx KTy
cf
Y = Y + softmax p
Vy WO
y
dky
Qx = XWxQ ,

K y = YW Ky , V y = YWVy

(6)
p
where dky is a scaling factor and the value of dky is the
dimension of K y , K y , and V y denote the key and value of Y,
and Qx implies the Query of X.
Then, two CBAMs are applied to Xcf and Ycf to explore the
salient information from two separated aspects. CBAM links
channel attention and spatial attention serially. For Xcf , CBAM
sequentially deduces a channel attention score Scx ∈ R1×1×c
and a spatial attention score Ssx ∈ Rh×w×1 with the assistance
of average-pooling, max-pooling, MLP, and convolution. Next,
the obtained scores are multiplied back to Xcf for producing
the refined feature data X̃. This procedure can be formulated
as

cf
X̃ = Scx Xcf ⊗ Xcf
 cf 
cf
X̃ = Ssx X̃ ⊗ X̃
(7)
where ⊗ means the element-wise multiplication. Likewise, the
CBAM process for Ycf is

cf
Ỹ = Scy Ycf ⊗ Ycf
 cf 
cf
Ỹ = Ssy Ỹ ⊗ Ỹ
(8)
where Scy ∈ R1×1×c and Ssy ∈ Rh×w×1 denote the channel
and attention scores. By exploring the salient messages, the
changed/unchanged information within RS images can be
highlighted. More details of CBAM can be referred to [54].
3) Structure of Siamese Encoder: Now, let us introduce the
structure of our Siamese encoder. It comprises three stages
serially, and each stage incorporates two SAVT blocks and
an FRFM. When bi-temporal RS images {I A , I B } with the
size of H × W × 3 are input the encoder, the two SAVT
blocks in the first stage will map them into feature maps F1A ∈
R(H/4)×(W/4)×C1 and F1B ∈ R(H/4)×(W/4)×C1 . Then, {F1A , F1B }

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Architecture of the restoring block and the refining block.

will be fed into the FRFM to generate the enhanced features
{F̃1A , F̃1B } ∈ R(H/4)×(W/4)×C1 . By analogy, after the second and
third stages, we can get {F2A , F2B , F̃2A , F̃2B } ∈ R(H/8)×(W/8)×C2
and {F3A , F3B , F̃3A , F̃3B } ∈ R(H/16)×(W/16)×C3 orderly. These feature maps involve not only the RS images’ complex contents
with various scales but also the temporal messages. Here,
we set the number of channels C1 , C2 , and C3 to be 64,
128, and 256, respectively. In addition, the stride s in the
overlapping embedding scheme is set to be 4 for the first stage
and is set to be 2 for the last two stages.
C. Edge-Aware Decoder
So far, we have obtained the encoded feature maps
{F̃1A , F̃2A , F̃3A , F̃1B , F̃2B , F̃3B } for bi-temporal RS images I A and
I B . Then, they will be fed into the edge-aware decoder
to produce the change map. Meanwhile, our decoder will
generate an edge map to ensure the estimated changed areas
have smooth and accurate edges. Along with the proposed
joint loss function, the exact CD results can be obtained. The
detailed framework of the edge-aware decoder is shown in
Fig. 6, which incorporates a restoring block and a refining
block.
1) Restoring Block: The goal of the restoring block is to
integrate encoded feature maps’ contributions. First, we concatenate the feature maps with the same scales in the channel
dimension, i.e.,


W
H
O1 = F̃1A ; F̃1B ∈ R 4 × 4 ×2C1


H
W
O2 = F̃2A ; F̃2B ∈ R 8 × 8 ×2C2


H
W
O3 = F̃3A ; F̃3B ∈ R 16 × 16 ×2C3 .
(9)
Then, three 3 × 3 convolutions are adopted to fuse the concatenated feature maps from the temporal aspects, i.e.,
Oi′ = Conv3×3 (Oi ),

i = 1, 2, 3

(10)

where Conv3×3 (·) denotes the 3 × 3 convolution. Here, the
spatial sizes of Oi′ are the same as the Oi , and the channel
numbers Oi′ are half of Oi . After applying up-sampling operations to O′2 and O′3 , the fused features Om can be generated by
concatenating them in the channel direction, and this process
can be formulated as



H
W
Om = O′1 , Up O′2 , Up O′3 ∈ R 4 × 4 ×(C1 +C2 +C3 ) (11)
where Up(·) means the up-sampling operations.

2) Refining Block: As the name suggests, this block is
developed to improve the feature map Om for CD. To further
highlight multiscale information and temporal clues hidden
in Om , we stack four 3 × 3 convolutions, one 1 × 1 convolution, two SAVTs (with only one SAVT encoder), two
de-convolutions, and three batch-norms. The convolutions are
used to capture the local knowledge, two SAVTs are adopted
to analyze the global contextual clues, and de-convolutions
are introduced to accomplish up-sampling with the consideration of relations between feature pixels. Particularly, Om
is first passed through a 3 × 3 convolution and a SAVT
to generate O′m ∈ R(H/4)×(W/4)×(C1 +C2 +C3 )/2 . Then, O′m will
be fed into two de-convolutions in sequence for producing
O′′m ∈ R H ×W ×⌈(C1 +C2 +C3 )/12⌉ . Note that two batch norms are
followed by two de-convolutions, respectively. Finally, other
two 3 × 3 convolutions, one 1 × 1 convolution, and a SAVT
will be applied to O′′m for achieving the improved feature map
O ∈ R H ×W ×2 .
The reasons we leverage different tools to adjust the feature
maps’ sizes in two blocks are summarized as follows. First,
the main goal of the restoring block is to fuse the encoded
feature maps {F̃1A , F̃1B , F̃2A , F̃2B , F̃3A , F̃3B }. To this end, a simple
and time-saving operation is needed to readily integrate all
feature maps from the Siamese encoder. Therefore, we use upsampling here to unify their spatial sizes. Second, the function
of the refining block is to enhance the integrated feature map
Om . To achieve this goal, the information within Om should be
analyzed carefully. Thus, de-convolution is adopted to adjust
the feature map’s size and explore the valuable clues within
the feature map simultaneously.
3) Loss Function for Joint Learning: When we get O, the
final change map could be produced using a simple comparison scheme with a proper change loss function commonly.
This way is feasible, however, it is not good at maintaining
the edges of changed areas which would limit the accuracies
of CD results. To overcome this limitation, we add an edge
detection task to ensure that our model can be aware of the
edges. To generate the change and edge predictions, we regard
two channels of O as the confidence degrees of the change
and edge information following the semantic segmentation
ideas [55]. Thus, when O is mapped into Ms ∈ R H ×W ×2
by a softmax function, it can be split in the channel wise
to generate a change map Mc ∈ R H ×W ×1 and an edge map
Me ∈ R H ×W ×1 . Then, a joint loss function is proposed to
narrow the gaps between them and the different ground truths.
Considering the binarity of our tasks, the binary cross-entropy

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

Fig. 7.

Flowchart of generating edge ground truths.

(BCE) loss [56] is selected as the basic unit of our joint loss
function. For the change map Mc , the change loss is defined
as
Lc = −Gc log(Mc ) − (1 − Gc ) log(1 − Mc )

(12)

where Gc indicates the CD ground truth. For the edge map
Me , the edge loss is specified as
Le = −Ge log(Me ) − (1 − Ge ) log(1 − Me )

patch pairs into 256 × 256 and get 7120 training pairs,
2048 testing pairs, and 1024 validation pairs according to the
suggestions in [42]. CDD encompasses 16 000 season-varying
RS image pairs collected from Google Earth. Their spatial
sizes are 256 × 256, and their resolution varies from 0.03 to
1 m. The changed land covers are diverse in CDD, including
buildings, cars, and roads. In agreement with the original
literature, the numbers of images in the training, testing, and
validation sets are 10 000, 3000, and 3000, respectively. WHU
encloses a pair of RS images. Their spatial sizes and resolution
are 32 507 × 15 354 and 0.2 m. The key objects in this dataset
are buildings. Similar to [44], we first cut the images into
256 × 256 patches. Then, 5974, 744, and 743 image pairs are
selected to construct the training, testing, and validation sets.
The examples of three datasets and their change/edge detection
ground truths are exhibited in Fig. 8.

(13)

where Ge denotes the edge detection ground truth. Finally, the
joint loss function can be formulated as
L = λLc + (1 − λ)Le

5602015

(14)

where λ is a free parameter that controls the contributions of
different terms.
There is another point we want to touch on, that is, the
way for collecting the edge ground truth. Instead of annotating
the edges of the changed areas manually, we can use Gc
to generate Ge automatically. The schematic illustration of
generating the edge ground truth can be found in Fig. 7.
In detail, the Canny operator [57] is first applied to Gc for
producing the original edges of the changed areas Gep . Then,
by passing Gep through a 3 × 3 convolution, the dilatant edges
Gde can be obtained. In the following experiments, the dilatant
and primary edge ground truths will be used to train our model
sequentially. The main reason for collecting two sets of edge
detection ground truths is to enable our EATDer to capture the
edges of the changed areas in a coarse-to-fine way. The dilatant
edge ground truth can help EATDer rapidly explore the edges
of the changed areas. While the primary edge ground truth can
assist EATDer in refining the obtained edges. Combining Gde
and Gep , the edges of changed areas in the final change maps
are smooth and accurate. The impacts of Gde and Gep on our
EATDer would be discussed in Section IV-E4.
IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Datasets Introduction
We select three CD datasets to evaluate the proposed EATDer, including the LEVIR building CD dataset
(LEVIR-CD) [58], the CD dataset (CDD) proposed in [59],
and the Wuhan University CD dataset (WHU) [60].
LEVIR-CD contains 637 Google Earth image patch pairs
with a size of 1024 × 1024 pixels. The pixel resolution of
those images is 0.5 m. LEVIR-CD mainly focuses on the
changes in various buildings, such as villa residences and tall
apartments. The original dataset is divided into 445 training
pairs, 128 testing pairs, and 64 validation pairs. However,
considering the limited computational capacity, we crop the

B. Experimental Settings
The experiments are conducted using the Pytorch platform
on a workstation with two GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs which
have 24G Memory and 35.6 Tera floating point operations. Our
EATDer is initialized with Xavier [61] to avoid the gradient
vanishing and gradient explosion. The AdamW algorithm is
adopted to optimize the parameters of our model. The learning
rate, training epochs, and batch size are set to 0.001, 200,
and 22. Note that we use the dilatant/original edge detection
ground truths to train EATDer at the first and last 100 epochs.
All RS images are resized into 256 × 256, and the common
data augmentation strategies (e.g., flipping and rotation) are
utilized to stabilize the model training. Three crucial free
parameters should be decided in advance, i.e., the number of
SAVT encoders L, the weight λ for two terms in (14), and
the number of heads n in MSA [see (2)]. In the following
experiments, we set L = 4, λ = 0.3, and n = 4 unless
otherwise stated. Their influence on EATDer will be discussed
in Section IV-F.
Here, we select precision (P), recall (R), F1-score (F1),
and overall accuracy (OA) to achieve numerical assessments.
Their definitions are
TP
TP
, R=
P=
TP + FP
TP + FN
2× P × R
TP + TN
F1 =
, OA =
(15)
P+R
TP + FP + FN + TN
where TP, TN, FP, and FN imply the numbers of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative pixels,
respectively.
C. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
To study the performance of EATDer objectively, we compare it with the following nine methods, including
SNUNet [18], ChangeNet [62], DARnet [21], DSAMNet [63],
LightCDNet [64], ChangeFormer [46], BIT [42], ICIFNet [43], and CCLNet++ [65]. The first five methods are
developed based on CNN, while the last four models are
constructed based on the transformer. We complete these
methods by using the released codes. Their hyper-parameters

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 8. Examples of three datasets. The former and later RS images are shown in the first two rows. The third row displays the CD ground truths. The
original and dilatant edge detection ground truths are exhibited in the fourth and fifth rows.
TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE OF EATD ER AND C OMPARED M ETHODS C OUNTED ON T HREE DATASETS . T HE H IGHEST S CORES A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

are set according to the original literature, and the experimental
settings are the same as ours (see Section IV-B).
Table I summarizes the numerical results of different methods. From the observation of the table, we can find that the
behavior of EATDer is stronger than that of the compared
methods in most cases. Taking LEVIR-CD as an example, the
improvements achieved by EATDer in F1 are 1.65% (over
SNUNet), 7.60% (over ChangeNet), 0.78% (over DARnet),
2.91% (over DSAMNet), 0.55% (over LightCDNet), 0.72%
(over ChangeFormer), 1.19% (over BIT), 0.58% (over ICIFNet), and 0.35% (over CCLNet++). For another instance,
the enhancements obtained by our model in OA counted on
WHU are 0.56% (over SNUNet), 1.42% (over ChangeNet),
0.94% (over DARnet), 0.34% (over DSAMNet), 0.06% (over
LightCDNet), 0.50% (over ChangeFormer), 0.28% (over BIT),
0.06% (over ICIF-Net), and 0.04% (over CCLNet++). These
positive results owe to the following points. First, the stacked
SAVT blocks in the Siamese encoder can explore the complex
contents and their contextual relations from RS images, which
helps EATDer understand RS images deeply. Second, the
relationships of various land covers corresponding to RS
images collected in different periods are considered by the

proposed FRFM, which assists our model with the introduction
of temporal clues. Third, the edge-aware decoder focuses on
both change and edge detections, which ensures that EATDer
can generate satisfactory change maps. Apart from the OA,
P, R, and F1, we also count the parameters, FLOPS, and
inference time costs of EATDer and other methods. It is easy
to find that our EATDer is a relatively light and efficient
model.
Despite the success mentioned above, we notice that P
values of EATDer are not optimal in LEVIR-CD and WHU.
This is mainly caused by the imbalanced sample problem. It is
well-known that the number of changed samples is much less
than that of the unchanged samples in normal CD datasets.
Thus, the trained models are inclined to divide the pending
pixels into the unchanged group. In this case, the obtained
change maps would involve more FN pixels and fewer FP
pixels, leading to larger P values and smaller R values (see
ChangeFormer for LEVIR-CD and BIT for WHU). However,
the distinct value gaps between P and R are improper, implying
that the imbalanced sample issue impacts the models. Compared to them, although the P values of EATDer are slightly
lower, the differences between P and R values are evidently

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

5602015

Fig. 9. Change maps obtained by different methods on the LEVIR-CD dataset. The bi-temporal RS images are displayed in the first two columns, and their
CD ground truths are shown in the third column. The rest columns exhibit the produced change maps. For clarity, we mark TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels in
white, black, red, and green, respectively.

Fig. 10. Change maps obtained by different methods on the CDD dataset. The bi-temporal RS images are displayed in the first two columns, and their CD
ground truths are shown in the third column. The rest columns exhibit the produced change maps. For clarity, we mark TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels in white,
black, red, and green, respectively.

smaller, demonstrating that the proposed method can reduce
the influence of sample imbalanced troubles.
To further study our EATDer, we randomly select five RS
image pairs from each dataset, and their visual change maps
obtained by different methods are shown in Figs. 9–11. For
clarity, we use white, black, red, and green to represent TP, TN,
FP, and FN pixels, respectively. By investigating them, we can
find that the performance of the transformer-based models
(ChangeFormer, BIT, ICIF-Net, and CCLNet++) is better
than that of CNN-based approaches (SNUNet, ChangeNet,
DARnet, DSAMNet, and LightCDNet). This is because the
transformer-based models can capture both the local and
global information hidden in RS images. Furthermore, the
change maps generated by EATDer are the closest to the
ground truths, which incorporate accurate change areas with
clear edges. For example, in the third row of Fig. 9, the
changed land covers (houses) in our change map are detected
separately, and their edges are apparent. In the third row of
Fig. 10, the numbers of FP and FN pixels in our change map

are fewer than others. In the third row of Fig. 11, the changed
land covers, which occupy large areas and are accessible to
identify as background, can be detected by EATDer accurately.
These encouraging observations confirm the effectiveness of
the developed EATDer.
D. Rationality Analysis of Score Map Division
As introduced in Section III-C3, two tasks are developed
and added at the top of the edge-aware decoder, i.e., change
and edge detection. The CD task focuses on generating the
change maps, while edge detection aims at refining the edges
of the changed areas. To satisfy these two tasks, we first
pass the decoder’s output Oc ∈ R H ×W ×2 through a softmax
function to get Oc ∈ R H ×W ×2 , and then split it into a change
map Mc ∈ R H ×W ×1 and an edge map Me ∈ R H ×W ×1 from
the channel dimension. To further study if this operation is
useful or not, we remold our EATDer as follows. First, two
1 × 1 convolutions are applied to O for generating Oc ∈
R H ×W ×2 and Oe ∈ R H ×W ×2 , which are used to reflect change

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 11. Change maps obtained by different methods on the WHU dataset. The bi-temporal RS images are displayed in the first two columns, and their CD
ground truths are shown in the third column. The rest columns exhibit the produced change maps. For clarity, we mark TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels in white,
black, red, and green, respectively.
TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE OF EATD ER AND EATD ER - V 2
C OUNTED ON T HREE DATASETS (%)

and edge information, respectively. Then, the change and
edge maps Mnew
∈ R H ×W ×2 and Mnew
∈ R H ×W ×2 can be
c
e
obtained by passing them through a softmax function. Next,
new
the joint loss function closes the gaps between Mnew
and
c /Me
the corresponding ground truths. We name this reconstructive
model EATDer-v2. The performance of EATDer and EATDerv2 counted on three datasets is summarized in Table II.
By observing those results, we can find no distinct differences between the two detectors. This illustrates that directly
dividing O into two elements channel-wise is feasible for our
tasks.
E. Ablation Study
The behavior of our EATDer is decided by the following
four essential factors: the SAVT block, FRFM, refining block,
and edge clues. The first two factors belong to the Siamese
encoder, while the last two are associated with the edge-aware
decoder. To study them deeply, we conducted the following
experiments. Note that we only adopt F1 as the assessment
criterion in this section for clarity.
1) Ablation on SAVT Block: To verify the effectiveness of
the proposed SAVT block, we replace it with the original
transformer [66], PVT [52], PVT V2 [53], and SwinT [67]
to construct EATDer-T, EATDer-PVT, EATDer-PVTv2, and
EATDer-SwinT, respectively. For fairness, the number of heads

TABLE III
F1 S CORES (%), PARAMETER VOLUME , FLOP S , AND RUNNING T IMES OF
EATD ER AND I TS F OUR VARIETIES C OUNTED ON T HREE DATASETS

in MSA mechanisms is set to four, and experimental settings
are the same as the contents described in Section IV-B. The
results of four new models are exhibited in Table III, and the
results of the original EATDer are also displayed for reference.
Besides the F1 scores, we count the Parameters, FLOPs, and
inference time costs as well. We can find that our EATDer
outperforms other models in all cases by investigating them.
The reasons are 1) SAVT introduces the overlapping embedding scheme that benefits the exploration of local information
and 2) SAVT remolds MSA by a simple SAP, which can
reduce the time costs and parameter volume. The positive
results discussed above confirm the usefulness of our SAVT
block.
To further investigate the feature extraction capacity of
SAVT, we randomly select three bi-temporal RS image pairs
from LEVIR-CD and visualize the feature maps learned by
EATDer in Fig. 12. Also, the feature maps obtained by
EATDer-T are exhibited for reference. Observing these feature
maps shows us that both the SAVT block and the transformer
encoder can explore the significant clues hidden in temporal
RS images for downstream CD. Taking the feature maps
displayed in the second row as an example, the road in
the former RS image and the buildings in the later RS
images (which are the important messages for CD) can be
captured by both EATDer and EATDer-T. This suggests that
the proposed SAVT block possesses similar feature extraction
capabilities to the transformer encoder. Considering the lower
computational costs of the SAVT block, its superiorities are
undeniable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

5602015

TABLE V
F1-S CORE OF EATD ER , EATD ER - W / O -1 × 1, EATD ER -PVT V 2, AND
EATD ER -PVT V 2- W /-1 × 1 C OUNTED ON T HREE DATASETS (%)

TABLE VI
F1 S CORES (%) OF EATD ER AND I TS A BLATION VARIETIES
C OUNTED ON T HREE DATASETS

Fig. 12. Visualization of feature maps obtained by EATDer and EATDer-T.
Three bi-temporal RS images are displayed in the first column, and the feature
maps output in the different stages are exhibited in the last three columns
orderly.
TABLE IV
F1-S CORE OF EATD ER AND EATD ER -PVT V 2 C OUNTED ON T HREE
DATASETS (%). T HE S PATIAL S IZES I NPUT RS I MAGES A RE
VARIED F ROM 512 × 512 TO 128 × 128

As discussed in Section III-B1, SAVT is similar to PVT
V2 [53], which focuses on reducing the computational costs
of the transformer by decreasing the feature maps’ spatial
sizes. However, there are two different points between SAVT
and them. First, PVT V2 reduces the size of K and V to
a fixed scale. Compared to it, the reduced size of K and V
is adaptively decided by SAVT. The benefit of doing this is
that it reduces the complexity of parameter tuning based on
the size of input data and the requirements of downstream
tasks and maintains good performance. Second, compared
with PVT V2, SAVT adds a 1 × 1 convolution after the
dimension-reduced K and V . This seemingly inconspicuous
operation can help SAVT regularize the information within
the dimension-reduced feature maps.
We do two groups of experiments to confirm the above
statements. In the first group, we replaced all SAVT blocks
with PVT V2 to construct EATDer-PVTv2. Then, RS images
with different spatial sizes are input into EATDer and EATDerPVTv2 to study the advantages of SAVT’s adaptive dimension
reduction scheme. Note that the free parameters of PVT V2
are consistent with the original literature. The sizes of RS
images and F1 scores of RSCD results counted on three
datasets are displayed in Table IV. By observing the results,

we can find that EATDer outperforms EATDer-PVTv2 in
all cases. This indicates that compared to a fixed dimension
reduction mode, the adaptive dimension reduction strategy
in SAVT can better adapt to the RSCD task. Admittedly,
the reduced dimension (a free setting) of PVT V2 may be
improper for our tasks, and we can find an empirically optimal
dimension by careful tuning. However, the adaptive dimension
reduction scheme makes SAVT more extensive compared with
complicated tuning processes.
In the second group, we remove (add) 1 × 1 convolution
from (to) SAVT and PVT V2 to construct EATDer-w/o1 × 1 and EATDer-PVTv2-w/-1 × 1. In this way, the function
of the simple 1 × 1 convolution can be investigated. The
F1 scores of different models counted on different datasets
are exhibited in Table V. We can quickly discover that
the behavior of EATDer and EATDer-PVTv2-w/-1 × 1 is
stronger than that of EATDer-w/o-1 × 1 and EATDer-PVTv2.
This implies the adoption of 1 × 1 convolution (after the
dimension reduction) can normalize the knowledge of the
dimension-reduced feature maps so that the final RSCD results
can be improved.
2) Ablation on FRFM: As shown in Fig. 4, there are three
stages in the Siamese encoder, and each stage has an FRFM to
fuse the information from the bi-temporal RS images. Thus,
we remove FRFMs individually to study their contributions
to our EATDer deeply. In particular, we first remove the last
FRFM and construct a new change detector named EATDer-2FRFM. In this case, the outputs of two SAVT blocks {F3A , F3B }
and other enhanced feature maps {F̃1A , F̃1B , F̃2A , F̃2B } will be
fed into the edge-aware decoder to produce change maps.
Analogously, we remove the last two FRFMs and construct
EATDer-1-FRFM. In this specific scenario, the input for
the edge-aware decoder is {F̃1A , F̃1B , F2A , F2B , F3A , F3B }. Finally,
we remove all FRFM and establish EATDer-no-FRFM. In this
instance, the outputs of SAVT blocks will be input into the
decoder directly. The F1 scores of the above models counted
on three datasets are exhibited in Table VI. Also, the results
of EATDer are displayed for reference.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

By the observation of the results, we can find that the
behavior of detectors becomes stronger with the number of
FRFM increases. Taking the results counted on LEVIR-CD
as an example, the F1 score of EATDer-no-FRFM is only
90.93%. When we add FRFMs gradually to detectors, the
F1 score is increased to 91.13%. When three FRFMs are
all added (i.e., EATDer), the F1 score is as high as 91.20%.
This investigation means that FRFM plays a positive role in
our EATDer. By embedding it into the Siamese encoder, not
only can the valuable information corresponding to temporal
RS images be fused, but also the salient clues hidden in RS
images can be highlighted. Consequently, the CD results are
improved.
3) Ablation on Refining Block: To study the significance
of the refining block, we replace it with an up-sampling
and a 3 × 3 convolution. The constructed model is named
EATDer-no-Refine. Then, we use it to complete the CD on
three datasets with the same experimental settings discussed
in Section IV-B. Its F1 scores are also exhibited in Table VI.
By comparing the results, we can find a distinct performance
gap between EATDer-no-Refine and EATDer. Notably, compared with EATDer, the declines caused by removing the
refining block are −1.08% (LEVIR-CD), −1.32% (CDD), and
−0.97% (WHU). These discoveries demonstrate the importance of the refining block.
4) Ablation on Edge Clues: As mentioned in
Section III-C3, we add an edge detection task to improve our
CD results. To investigate if these clues are helpful or not,
we fix the weight of Le to zero and construct a new model
recorded EATDer-no-Edge. According to the experimental
settings mentioned in Section IV-B, we count the F1 scores
of EATDer-no-Edge and EATDer on three datasets which
can be found in Table VI. By observing them, we can find
that EATDer outperforms EATDer-no-Edge in all cases,
which implies the effectiveness of edge clues. Furthermore,
we also display some change maps obtained by EATDer and
EATDer-no-Edge in Fig. 13. Three bi-temporal RS image
pairs are selected from LEVIR-CD (the first row), CDD
(the second row), and WHU (the third row) randomly. From
the observation of these maps, we can find that the maps
generated by EATDer are closer to ground truths, and the
changed areas’ edges are continuous and apparent. These
visual results confirm the strength of edge clues.
Apart from the above discussion, we continue to study the
contributions of the primary edge ground truth Gep and dilatant
edge ground truth Gde , individually. To this end, we first only
use Gep to complete the training. In this case, the trained
EATDer is recorded as EATDer-PriEdge. Then, Gde and Gep are
both used to train EATDer. As explained in Section III-C3, Gde
is obtained by passing Gep through a 3 × 3 convolution. Here,
we want to study if the 3 × 3 convolution is a proper choice
for producing dilatant edge ground truth. Hence, we change
the convolution kernel size from 3 × 3 to 9 × 9 with an
interval of 2 × 2, and record different EATDers as EATDer3, EATDer5, EATDer7, and EATDer9, respectively. The
F1 scores of different models counted on three datasets are
depicted in Fig. 14. By observing the bars, we can find that
combining Gde and Gep is beneficial to CD tasks in most

Fig. 13. Change maps of EATDer and EATDer-no-Edge. The bi-temporal
RS images and their ground truths are exhibited in the first three columns.
The change maps are displayed in the last two columns.

Fig. 14.
F1 scores of EATDers with different edge ground truths.
(a) LEVIR-CD. (b) CDD. (c) WHU.

cases, which implies the necessity of collecting the dilatant
edges. However, another investigation is that when the size
of convolutional kernels increases, the behavior of EATDer
becomes weaker. This indicates that excessively inflated edges
will generate unfavorable information for CD tasks, thereby
reducing the accuracy of change maps. According to the
results, the 3 × 3 convolution is a proper choice for producing
dilatant edge ground truth.
F. Parameter Analysis
As discussed in Section IV-B, three free parameters should
be decided in advance, including the number of SAVT
encoders L, the weight λ in the loss function, and the number
of heads in MSA n. Here, we study their influence on EATDer
by altering their values.
For L, we fix λ = 0.3, n = 4, and change its values
from 2 to 8. The F1 scores of EATDers with various numbers
of SAVT encoders are displayed in Fig. 15. It is not surprising
that the more SAVT encoders, the stronger EATDer. This is
because the SAVT encoder focuses on exploring the local and
global information within RS images. More SAVT encoders
bring much richer knowledge that benefits downstream tasks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

5602015

Fig. 15.

F1 scores of EATDers with various numbers of SAVT encoders L. (a) LEVIR-CD. (b). CDD (c) WHU.

Fig. 16.

F1 scores of EATDers with different λ. (a) LEVIR-CD. (b) CDD. (c) WHU.

Fig. 17.

F1 scores of EATDers with different n. (a) LEVIR-CD. (b) CDD. (c) WHU.
TABLE VII
PARAMETER VOLUME AND FLOP S OF EATD ERS W ITH
VARIOUS N UMBERS OF SAVT E NCODERS

However, the parameters of our model will also explode when
more SAVT encoders are adopted. Therefore, we suggest L =
4 considering both performance and efficiency. Apart from the
F1 scores, we also count the parameter volume and FLOPs
of different EATDers, which are displayed in Table VII. Not
surprisingly, the parameter volume and FLOPs of EATDer
are both raised distinctly when L increases. Especially when
L > 4, the increase in the parameter volume and FLOPs
is much greater than the increase in the F1 score. Consequently, we suggest L = 4 considering both performance and
efficiency.
For λ, we settle L = 4, n = 4, and vary λ from 0.1 to
0.9 with an interval of 0.1. The F1 scores of EATDers with
different λ are summarized in Fig. 16. The trend of the three
curves is ascending slightly before declining intensively, and
their optimal ranges are [0.3, 0.4] (LEVIR-CD), [0.3, 0.5]
(CDD), and [0.2, 0.3] (WHU), respectively. These investigations imply the importance of the edge term Le is little bigger
than that of Lc . To sum up, we suggest λ = 0.3. If the readers
apply our EATDer on some new datasets, these two parameters
{L , λ} could be tuned beginning with {4, 0.3}.

For n, its values are varied in a range of [2, 4, 8]. Note
that when n changes, L and λ remain 4 and 0.3. The
F1 score curves of various EATDers with different n counted
on three datasets are exhibited in Fig. 17. We can find
that the behavior of EATDers becomes stronger when n is
varied from 2 to 4. Nevertheless, once n increases to 8, the
performance of EATDers is whittled down. This indicates
that when the number of heads increases (within a certain
range), the inherent global relationships in the input data can
be more thoroughly explored. However, when n exceeds a
certain threshold, the resulting global relationships become
less reliable due to excessive data fragmentation, leading to
a decrease in model performance. In summary, n = 4 is a
suitable setting for our model in CD tasks.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article presents a new CD method (EATDer) for RS
images. EATDer contains a Siamese encoder and an edgeaware decoder, and they aim to capture essential knowledge
from RS images and generate change maps, respectively.
The basic unit of the Siamese encoder is the SAVT block,
developed under the vision transformer’s framework. SAVT
can obtain local and global information from RS images with
respectable time costs by introducing the overlapping embedding scheme and remolding the MSA mechanism. We also
developed FRFM to further explore the temporal knowledge
among RS images. By embedding FRFMs into the Siamese
encoder, the land covers within RS images collected in different periods can be discovered mutually, which helps the
encoder to highlight the changed and unchanged areas. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5602015

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

edge-ware decoder consists of a restoring block and a refining
block, which focus on fusing the multiscale features and
enhancing their discrimination. Taking the edges of changed
areas into account, both change and edge detection results
are output by the decoder. Along with the joint loss function,
high-quality change maps can be produced. The encouraging
results counted on three widespread datasets confirm that the
proposed EATDer is applicable to RSCD.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Wen et al., “Change detection from very-high-spatial-resolution optical remote sensing images: Methods, applications, and future directions,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 68–101, Dec. 2021.
[2] X. Tang et al., “An unsupervised remote sensing change detection
method based on multiscale graph convolutional network and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5609715.
[3] X. Tang et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on 3-D
octave convolution with spatial–spectral attention network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2430–2447, Mar. 2021.
[4] Y. Yang et al., “AR2 Det: An accurate and real-time rotational one-stage
ship detector in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5605414.
[5] Z. Zhu, S. Qiu, and S. Ye, “Remote sensing of land change: A
multifaceted perspective,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 282, Dec. 2022,
Art. no. 113266.
[6] X. Tang, M. Li, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “EMTCAL:
Efficient multiscale transformer and cross-level attention learning for
remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5626915.
[7] X. Tang, W. Lin, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Class-level
prototype guided multiscale feature learning for remote sensing scene
classification with limited labels,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5622315.
[8] X. Tang et al., “Meta-hashing for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5615419.
[9] C. Liu, J. Ma, X. Tang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Deep hash
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3420–3443, Apr. 2021.
[10] A. P. Tewkesbury, A. J. Comber, N. J. Tate, A. Lamb, and P. F. Fisher,
“A critical synthesis of remotely sensed optical image change detection
techniques,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 160, pp. 1–14, Apr. 2015.
[11] Z. Zhu, “Change detection using Landsat time series: A review of
frequencies, preprocessing, algorithms, and applications,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 130, pp. 370–384, Aug. 2017.
[12] S. Saha, F. Bovolo, and L. Bruzzone, “Unsupervised deep change vector
analysis for multiple-change detection in VHR images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 3677–3693, Jun. 2019.
[13] H. Abdi and L. J. Williams, “Principal component analysis,” Wiley
Interdiscipl. Rev., Comput. Statist., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 433–459, 2010.
[14] H. Zheng et al., “HFA-Net: High frequency attention Siamese network
for building change detection in VHR remote sensing images,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 129, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 108717.
[15] W. Shi, M. Zhang, R. Zhang, S. Chen, and Z. Zhan, “Change detection
based on artificial intelligence: State-of-the-Art and challenges,” Remote
Sens., vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1688, May 2020.
[16] Z. Lv, T. Liu, J. A. Benediktsson, and N. Falco, “Land cover change
detection techniques: Very-high-resolution optical images: A review,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 44–63, Mar. 2022.
[17] R. C. Daudt, B. L. Saux, and A. Boulch, “Fully convolutional Siamese
networks for change detection,” in Proc. 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Image
Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2018, pp. 4063–4067.
[18] S. Fang, K. Li, J. Shao, and Z. Li, “SNUNet-CD: A densely connected
Siamese network for change detection of VHR images,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[19] G. Cheng, G. Wang, and J. Han, “ISNet: Towards improving separability
for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5623811.
[20] C. Zhang et al., “A deeply supervised image fusion network for
change detection in high resolution bi-temporal remote sensing
images,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 166, pp. 183–200,
Aug. 2020.

[21] Z. Li, C. Yan, Y. Sun, and Q. Xin, “A densely attentive refinement
network for change detection based on very-high-resolution bitemporal
remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 4409818.
[22] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[23] K. Han et al., “A survey on vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–110, Jan. 2023.
[24] J. Ma, M. Li, X. Tang, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Homo–
heterogenous transformer learning framework for RS scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 2223–2239, 2022.
[25] Z. Xu, W. Zhang, T. Zhang, Z. Yang, and J. Li, “Efficient transformer
for remote sensing image segmentation,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 18,
p. 3585, Sep. 2021.
[26] Z. Zheng, Y. Zhong, S. Tian, A. Ma, and L. Zhang, “ChangeMask: Deep
multi-task encoder-transformer-decoder architecture for semantic change
detection,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 183, pp. 228–239,
Jan. 2022.
[27] C. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Cheng, and Y. Li, “SwinSUNet: Pure transformer
network for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5224713.
[28] S. Liu, D. Marinelli, L. Bruzzone, and F. Bovolo, “A review of change
detection in multitemporal hyperspectral images: Current techniques,
applications, and challenges,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 140–158, Jun. 2019.
[29] Y. Afaq and A. Manocha, “Analysis on change detection techniques
for remote sensing applications: A review,” Ecol. Informat., vol. 63,
Jul. 2021, Art. no. 101310.
[30] F. Liu, L. Jiao, X. Tang, S. Yang, W. Ma, and B. Hou, “Local restricted
convolutional neural network for change detection in polarimetric SAR
images,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 818–833, Mar. 2019.
[31] Q. Wang, Z. Yuan, Q. Du, and X. Li, “GETNET: A general end-to-end
2-D CNN framework for hyperspectral image change detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 3–13, Jan. 2019.
[32] L. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Wang, and L. Bruzzone, “RSCNet: A residual
self-calibrated network for hyperspectral image change detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5529917.
[33] Y. Li, C. Peng, Y. Chen, L. Jiao, L. Zhou, and R. Shang, “A deep
learning method for change detection in synthetic aperture radar images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 5751–5763,
Aug. 2019.
[34] H. Chen, C. Wu, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Change detection
in multisource VHR images via deep Siamese convolutional multiplelayers recurrent neural network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2848–2864, Apr. 2020.
[35] T. Liu et al., “Building change detection for VHR remote sensing images
via local–global pyramid network and cross-task transfer learning strategy,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4704817.
[36] P. Chen, B. Zhang, D. Hong, Z. Chen, X. Yang, and B. Li, “FCCDN:
Feature constraint network for VHR image change detection,” ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 187, pp. 101–119, May 2022.
[37] B. Bai, W. Fu, T. Lu, and S. Li, “Edge-guided recurrent convolutional neural network for multitemporal remote sensing image building
change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5610613.
[38] J. Lei, Y. Gu, W. Xie, Y. Li, and Q. Du, “Boundary extraction constrained
Siamese network for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5621613.
[39] S. Khan, M. Naseer, M. Hayat, S. W. Zamir, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah,
“Transformers in vision: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54,
no. 10s, pp. 1–41, Jan. 2022.
[40] L. Wang et al., “UNetFormer: A UNet-like transformer for efficient
semantic segmentation of remote sensing urban scene imagery,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 190, pp. 196–214, Aug. 2022.
[41] D. Wang et al., “Advancing plain vision transformer toward remote
sensing foundation model,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5607315.
[42] H. Chen, Z. Qi, and Z. Shi, “Remote sensing image change detection
with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5607514.
[43] Y. Feng, H. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Liu, and J. Zheng, “ICIF-Net: Intra-scale
cross-interaction and inter-scale feature fusion network for bitemporal
remote sensing images change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4410213.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: EATDer: EDGE-ASSISTED ADAPTIVE TRANSFORMER DETECTOR FOR RSCD

[44] Q. Li, R. Zhong, X. Du, and Y. Du, “TransUNetCD: A hybrid transformer network for change detection in optical remote-sensing images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5622519.
[45] W. Wang, X. Tan, P. Zhang, and X. Wang, “A CBAM based multiscale
transformer fusion approach for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 6817–6825, 2022.
[46] W. G. C. Bandara and V. M. Patel, “A transformer-based Siamese
network for change detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens.
Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 207–210.
[47] D. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Du, G.-S. Xia, and D. Tao, “An empirical study of
remote sensing pretraining,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5608020.
[48] Y. Xu, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, and D. Tao, “ViTAE: Vision transformer
advanced by exploring intrinsic inductive bias,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 28522–28535.
[49] H. Wu et al., “CvT: Introducing convolutions to vision transformers,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 22–31.
[50] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo,
“SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with
transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021,
pp. 12077–12090.
[51] X. Dong et al., “CSWin transformer: A general vision transformer backbone with cross-shaped windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 12114–12124.
[52] W. Wang et al., “Pyramid vision transformer: A versatile backbone for
dense prediction without convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 548–558.
[53] W. Wang et al., “PVT v2: Improved baselines with pyramid vision
transformer,” Comput. Vis. Media, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 415–424, Sep. 2022.
[54] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV),
Sep. 2018, pp. 3–19.
[55] S. Minaee, Y. Boykov, F. Porikli, A. Plaza, N. Kehtarnavaz, and
D. Terzopoulos, “Image segmentation using deep learning: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 3523–3542,
Jul. 2022.
[56] P.-T. de Boer, D. P. Kroese, S. Mannor, and R. Y. Rubinstein, “A tutorial on the cross-entropy method,” Ann. Oper. Res., vol. 134, no. 1,
pp. 19–67, Feb. 2005.
[57] J. Canny, “A computational approach to edge detection,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. PAMI-8, no. 6, pp. 679–698, Nov. 1986.
[58] H. Chen and Z. Shi, “A spatial–temporal attention-based method and a
new dataset for remote sensing image change detection,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1662, May 2020.
[59] M. A. Lebedev, Y. V. Vizilter, O. V. Vygolov, V. A. Knyaz, and
A. Y. Rubis, “Change detection in remote sensing images using conditional adversarial networks,” Int. Arch. Photogramm., Remote Sens.
Spatial Inf. Sci., vol. XLII-2, pp. 565–571, May 2018.
[60] S. Ji, S. Wei, and M. Lu, “Fully convolutional networks for multisource
building extraction from an open aerial and satellite imagery data
set,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 574–586,
Jan. 2019.
[61] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
Statist., 2010, pp. 249–256.
[62] A. Varghese, J. Gubbi, A. Ramaswamy, and P. Balamuralidhar,
“ChangeNet: A deep learning architecture for visual change detection,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Sep. 2018, pp. 129–145.
[63] M. Liu and Q. Shi, “DSAMNet: A deeply supervised attention metric
based network for change detection of high-resolution images,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp. (IGARSS), Jul. 2021,
pp. 6159–6162.
[64] H. Yang et al., “A lightweight Siamese neural network for building
change detection using remote sensing images,” Remote Sens., vol. 15,
no. 4, p. 928, Feb. 2023.
[65] Z. Song, X. Wei, X. Kang, S. Li, and J. Liu, “Toward efficient remote
sensing image change detection via cross-temporal context learning,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5404210.
[66] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[67] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.

5602015

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor at the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include computational
intelligence and image understanding.

Junyi Duan received the B.E. degree in intelligent science and technology from Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2021, where he is currently pursuing the master’s degree in computer science and
technology with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry
of Education.
His main research directions include image perception and understanding, remote-sensing change
detection, and deep learning.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuits
and systems from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery at the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently a Full Professor at the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. His
research interests include remote sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remote
sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, please refer
to: https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/.
Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is currently a Professor with the Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine
learning, and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.
Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education of China. He has authored
or coauthored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include
signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet
theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is a member of the IEEE Xian Section Executive Committee and
an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:55:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

