IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

5611715

Interacting-Enhancing Feature Transformer for
Cross-Modal Remote-Sensing Image
and Text Retrieval
Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yijing Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu , Member, IEEE, and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Cross-modal remote-sensing image–text retrieval
(CMRSITR) is a challenging topic in the remote-sensing (RS)
community. It has gained growing attention because it can be
flexibly used in many practical applications. In the current
deep era, with the help of deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs), many successful CMRSITR methods have been proposed. Most of them first learn valuable features from RS
images and texts, respectively. Then, the obtained visual and
textual features are mapped into a common space for the
final retrieval. The above operations are feasible; however, two
difficulties are still to be solved. One is that the semantics
within the visual and textual features are misaligned due to the
independent learning manner. The other one is that the deep
links between RS images and texts cannot be fully explored
by simple common space mapping. To overcome the above
challenges, we propose a new model named interacting-enhancing
feature transformer (IEFT) for CMRSITR, which regards the RS
images and texts as a whole. First, a simple feature embedding
module (FEM) is developed to map images and texts into
the visual and textual feature spaces. Second, an information
interacting-enhancing module (IIEM) is designed to simultaneously model the inner relationships between RS images and texts
and enhance the visual features. IIEM consists of three feature
interacting-enhancing (FIE) blocks, each of which contains an
intermodality relationship interacting (IMRI) subblock and a
visual feature enhancing (VFE) subblock. The duty of IMRI
is to exploit the hidden relations between cross-modal data,
while the responsibility of VFE is to improve the visual features.
By combining them, semantic bias can be mitigated, and the
complex contents of RS images can be studied. Finally, the
retrieval module (RM) is constructed to generate the matching
scores for deciding the search results. Extensive experiments
are conducted on four public RS datasets. The positive results
demonstrate that our IEFT can achieve superior retrieval performance compared with many existing methods. Our source codes
Manuscript received 29 October 2022; revised 13 April 2023;
accepted 23 May 2023. Date of publication 29 May 2023; date of
current version 13 June 2023. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62171332 and
Grant 62276197; and in part by the Fund of the National Key Laboratory
of Science and Technology on Remote Sensing Information and imagery
Analysis, Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology, under Grant
6142A010301. (Corresponding author: Jingjing Ma.)
Xu Tang, Yijing Wang, Jingjing Ma, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com; jjma@ieee.org).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of the Ministry of Education, School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing 210094, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3280546, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3280546

are available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/Cross-modalremote-sensing-image-and-text-retrieval-models/tree/main/IEFT.
Index Terms— Cross-modal remote-sensing
retrieval (CMRSITR), transformer.

image–text

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the development of Earth observation technologies, collecting a large number of remote-sensing
(RS) images is not a difficult task anymore [1], [2], [3].
They provide new opportunities for scholars to explore our
planet. Before using the proper interpretation methods to
mine the information from them, managing these large RS
images according to specific demands is an indispensable
step [4]. To this end, information retrieval entries the RS
community. There are two common retrieval techniques for
RS images, that is, content-based RS image retrieval (CBRSIR) [5], [6], [7] and cross-modal RS image–text retrieval
(CMRSITR) [8], [9], [10], [11]. CBRSIR aims to search
the target RS images with similar contents to the query
RS image, highlighting the image contents’ understanding.
CMRSITR refers to using one modality of data to find the most
semantic consistency data in another modality, which emphasizes the exploration of the latent correspondence between
images and texts. Each of them has its advantages. However,
compared with CBRSIR, CMRSITR (the topic of this article)
attracts more attention recently since it establishes a bridge
between the RS image understanding and language comprehension, which is beneficial to many practical applications
[12], [13], [14], [15].
The study of CMRSITR is still in its infancy. With the
help of deep-learning techniques, several CMRSITR methods
have been proposed [8], [9], [10], [16], [17]. Most of them
are dual-branch networks. One branch aims at learning the
visual features from RS images, and the other focuses on
extracting the textual representations from texts. When the
different features are obtained, some specific layers embedded
at the top of the model are developed to map them into the
joint space so that the similarities between RS images and
texts can be measured directly. Here, the common tools for
visual feature learning are deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs) [18], the usual techniques for textual representation
learning are recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [19], and the
popular loss functions are the triplet loss and its variants [20].
Although these dual-branch methods are feasible, their

1558-0644 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

performance cannot still reach what we expected. The reasons
behind this are twofold. First, since those models learn the
features of RS images and texts independently, in general,
the semantic gaps between different feature representations
are distinct [21]. In other words, the semantics within visual
features and textual representations are misaligned [22], which
would reduce the reliability of the resemblance measurement.
Second, the above CMRSITR methods mainly emphasize
feature learning. However, modeling relations between RS
images and texts properly is often ignored. This is adverse to
mining the semantic correspondence under this cross-modal
scenario [23].
The transformer [24], [25], [26] has recently drawn scholars’ attention because of its inherent advantages in modeling
relationships hidden in the input data. The transformer-based
models become prevalent in diverse computer vision applications [27], [28], [29], as well as the cross-modal image–text
retrieval [22], [23], [30]. On the one hand, owing to the
peculiar structure, the images and texts are fed into a unified
network, and the corresponding visual features and textual
representations can be learned simultaneously. This guarantees
semantic consistency between different features. On the other
hand, benefiting from the self-attention mechanism (SAM),
the relations between images and texts can also be modeled
deeply in the transformer-based models. This is conducive
to establishing the semantic correspondence between two
modalities effectively. One question is raised, can we transfer
these methods to RS tasks directly?
The answer is probably negative. Although the
above-mentioned methods have shown their superiorities
in natural image processing, there are still some challenges
to be addressed when applying them to the RS images. First,
the transformer-based methods focus on building cross-modal
relationships. However, they do not attach importance to
image feature learning. This limitation is inconspicuous to
natural images but is catastrophic to RS images since they
contain a large number of land covers with diverse types and
multiple scales. Second, the images’ spatialwise information
is fully considered when they apply SAM to model the
cross-modal relationships. Nevertheless, the channelwise
knowledge hidden in the corresponding feature maps does
not get the attention it deserves, limiting their ability to
understand RS images.
To address the above problems, inspired by vision-andlanguage transformer (ViLT) [23], we propose a new CMRSITR method named interacting-enhancing feature transformer
(IEFT). The IEFT contains a feature embedding module
(FEM), an information interacting-enhancing module (IIEM),
and a retrieval module (RM). FEM introduces a pretrained Bert
tokenizer and a simple linear projector to transform texts and
RS images into feature embeddings. Then, these embeddings
are fed into IIEM simultaneously to keep feature consistency.
IIEM is developed based on the transformer. On the one
hand, it leverages SAM to model the relationships between
texts and RS images at the spatial level. On the other hand,
considering the complex contents hidden in RS images, IIEM
also improves the visual feature embeddings by investigating
their channelwise and localwise information. RM comprises

three transformer encoders and an image–text matching (ITM)
head. The transformer encoders aim to discover inner relations
between texts and RS images. The ITM head focuses on
generating the matching scores, which can be used directly
to get the retrieval results.
1) We propose an end-to-end CMRSITR model (i.e., IEFT).
Instead of exploring valuable information from RS
images and texts individually, IEFT simultaneously processes RS images and texts, so the visual and textual knowledge can be learned with small distribution
misaligned.
2) IEFT can inherently explore the relationships between
RS images and texts by taking advantage of SAM
within the transformer. In this way, the final cross-modal
matching decisions tend to be creditable.
3) To further mine the useful information, we develop two
simple, yet useful units to capture the complex contents
within RS images from the channel and local aspects.
By embedding them into our IEFT, the obtained visual
features for RS images are more discriminative.
4) Extensive experiments are conducted on four benchmark
datasets, and the encouraging results demonstrate that
the proposed method is effective.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Previous
works related to CMRSITR are reviewed in Section II. Then,
the proposed method is introduced in Section III. The experimental results and discussion are given in Section IV. Finally,
the conclusions are summarized in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Cross-Modal Image–Text Retrieval
Cross-modal image–text retrieval refers to finding semantically similar data between images and texts. According to
the type of images, we review some published works from
the following two aspects, including cross-modal natural scene
image-text retrieval (CMNSITR) and CMRSITR.
1) Cross-Modal Natural Scene Image–Text Retrieval:
CMNSITR is always a hot research topic in image processing,
which aims to find semantically similar data across images and
texts [31], [32]. Especially in the current deep era, the rapid
development of CMNSITR is obvious to all [33]. As early as
2018, You et al. [34] developed an end-to-end semantic embedding model for CMNSITR. This method leverages DCNNs to
learn hierarchical features from both images and texts first.
Then, the local information (within the middle-level features)
and the semantic messages (within the high-level features)
are combined by a specific learning objective function to
complete the cross-modal retrieval. The positive experimental
results confirm its helpfulness. This kind of solution can
also be found in [35], [36], and [37]. Although the above
methods’ performance is good, they still face the problem
of heterogeneity gaps. To mitigate this issue, Gu et al. [32]
developed a generative model to map images and texts into
a common semantic space. By introducing the generative
adversarial scheme, the global abstract and local grounded
features can be explored from dual-modal data. Ji et al. [38]
developed two specific networks based on DCNN and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

long short-term memory (LSTM) model. After fully mining
the valuable information from images and texts using two
networks, the different information is mapped into a common
space for completing the cross-modal similarity matching.
Considering the diverse contents within images, some scholars
add object detection tools into their cross-modal method, such
as [39], [40], [41], [42], and [43]. This way, the images can be
interpreted comprehensively so that the cross-modal retrieval
performance can be enhanced.
Recently, when the transformer appears, it attracts
researchers’ attention instantly due to its strong capacity for
relationship learning. In the CMNSITR field, many interesting
works have been proposed and achieved impressive results. For
instance, vision-and-language BERT (ViLBERT) [44] combines three basic transformers to deal with the cross-modal
retrieval tasks. The first two transformers are used to learn the
features from images and texts separately. Here, rather than a
whole image, the various objects within the image are detected
for visual feature learning. The last one is used to model
the inner relationships for measuring the similarities. Meanwhile, universal image-text representation (UNITER) [30] and
object-semantics aligned pre-training (OSCAR) [22] directly
introduce a single transformer to both process images (at the
object level) and texts and study the cross-modal relationships.
To further ensure the stability and discrimination of visual
features, ViLT [23] adds a lightweight learnable linear projector to map whole images into feature embeddings. Then,
a transformer is adopted to analyze the cross-modal relations.
Unlike the methods mentioned above, align the image and
text representations before fusing (ALBEF) [45] uses web data
and a momentum distillation scheme to enhance the retrieval
performance. This approach improves the model’s ability to
understand and reason about cross-modal relationships.
2) Cross-Modal Remote-Sensing Image–Text Retrieval: In
the CMRSITR community, some successful methods have
been proposed. Yuan et al. [16] developed an asymmetric
multimodal feature matching network (AMFMN) for CMRSITR tasks, in which the multiscale characteristic of RS
images are fully considered for deeply interpreting their
diverse land covers. AMFMN first introduces the multiscale
visual self-attention scheme to find the salient areas within RS
images and guide the text representation learning at the same
time. Then, a specific triplet loss is developed to bridge the
relations between data from different modalities. The positive
results counted on their constructed dataset imply the effectiveness of AMFMN. To enhance the feasibility of the retrieval
approach, a lightweight retrieval model was presented in [8],
in which the multiscale feature learning scheme, abundant feature filter mechanism, lightweight text representation extraction strategy, and knowledge distillation policy are combined
for CMRSITR. Meanwhile, another model was published by
the same group [10]. In this model, the authors emphasize the
importance of visual feature learning in CMRSITR. Both the
global and local information are considered when transforming
RS images into discriminative visual features. Such that the
complex contents hidden in RS images can be understood
for cross-modal retrieval. The above methods are supervised,
whose behavior depends on many labeled data. To relieve

5611715

this burden, Mikriukov et al. [46] introduced an unsupervised
method for CMRSITR, where contrastive learning, hashing,
and multiobjective optimization techniques are integrated.
The encouraging results confirm its helpfulness. Despite the
advancements in implementing these methods, a significant
opportunity for enhancement persists. Because the current
approach primarily utilizes triplet loss to regulate the semantic
associations between different modalities, ignoring the challenging situation that the feature spaces of each modality are
distinct and independent.
B. Transformer-Based Methods for RS Data
Transformer [24] was first proposed for natural language
processing [25], [47], [48], [49]. Inspired by its powerful
ability in long-range dependence learning, the transformer
has become prevalent in computer vision [50], as well as
the RS community. Bazi et al. [51] first applied a transformer
to RS image processing. They leveraged vision transformer
(ViT) [26] to handle the RS scene classification tasks. Owing
to the multihead attention (MHA) mechanisms, the global
contextual information can be fully explored so that the classification results are competitive. Another transformer-based
RS scene classification method was proposed in [52]. Based
on ViT, the authors developed specific schemes to capture
the spatialwise and channelwise information from RS scenes.
In this way, the detailed geometric clues and the contributions
of multiple feature maps can be utilized to distinguish the
various scenes. Ma et al. [53] proposed a homo-heterogeneous
transformer learning (HHTL) framework for the RS scene
classification. This method fully considers the homogenous
and heterogeneous knowledge within RS scenes. Along with
the transformer structure, the learned features are discriminative for classification. To reduce the time costs caused
by SAM, an efficient multiscale transformer was proposed
in [54]. By changing the MHA mechanism into a 2-D version
and introducing the dilated convolution, the rich contextual
information within RS scenes can be explored at a small time
cost.
The above transformer-based methods were scene-oriented.
Many models have been developed based on the transformer for objectwise and pixelwise applications. For instance,
Wang et al. [55] combined DCNN and transformer to adaptively capture local and global information from RS images
so that the objects can be detected from the complex background. In this method, an adjacent feature-aligned module is
developed to align adjacent features, and an interactive guidance loss is formulated to achieve joint region and boundary
detection. Therefore, diverse objects can be effectively discovered. A transformer-based method named SpectralFormer was
introduced in [56] for hyperspectral image classification tasks.
SpectralFormer uses groupwise spectral embedding to learn
local information and adopts the cross-layer adaptive fusion
scheme to combine the valuable information from multiple
layers. The promising results counted on several hyperspectral
images confirm its effectiveness. Li et al. [57] proposed an
end-to-end hybrid transformer model (TransUNetCD) for RS
image change detection under the Unet framework. TransUNetCD first uses Siamese DCNN to fully learn the shallow

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

and high deep features from bitemporal RS images. Then,
a transformer module is developed to mine the global context
information. The encouraging results reported in the literature
illustrate that the transformer is useful in RS change detection.
A wide-context network was introduced in [58] for RS image
semantic segmentation. The detailed local information and
the global contextual relations can be captured by combining
the normal convolution and transformer. Thus, satisfactory
semantic segmentation results can be obtained based on this
luxuriant knowledge.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
A. Overall Framework
The architecture of IEFT is shown in Fig. 1, consisting of
an FEM, an IIEM, and an RM. Suppose we have a set of
RS image and text pairs (V, T ), where V = {v1 , . . . , v N }
and T = {t1 , . . . , t N } indicate RS images and texts, and N
denotes the volume of the set. Their relationship labels are
m = {m 1 , . . . , m N }, where m i = 1 means that vi and ti
contain similar concepts, while m i = 0 implies that they
have different concepts. FEM aims to map RS image and
text pairs (V, T ) into d-dimensional feature embeddings F =
{F1 , . . . , F N } and G = {G1 , . . . , G N }. The goals of IIEM
are twofold. One is to model the intermodality relationships
by mutually investigating the features corresponding to two
modalities. The other is to enhance the RS image features
by exploring channelwise information and salient local areas.
Finally, RM continues to further fuse two modalities features
for narrowing the possible semantic gaps and leverages the
ITM head to output the matching scores. In the training phase,
we adopt the cross-entropy loss function to optimize our model
by mining the differences between the output scores and the
relationship labels. In the inference phase, the matching scores
are utilized to produce the retrieval results. Now, we explain
each module in detail.
B. Feature Embedding Module
As illustrated in Fig. 2, FEM contains a text embedding
block and an image embedding block. They are developed
to transform texts and the corresponding RS images into
d-dimensional features.
1) Text Embedding Block: Unlike many existing works [8],
[10], we employ a pretrained Bert tokenizer [25], [44] instead
of common RNNs to learn the texts’ features. This is because
Bert is a transformer-based model, which is consistent with the
rest of our IEFT. Note that the common mask-maker strategy
in Bert’s training is excluded to ensure the textual integrity
of our task. Also, the Bert tokenizer’s parameters would be
updated along with the training of the proposed IEFT.
We assume that a text ti contains l words, which can be
expressed as ti = {wi1 , . . . , wil }. First, a predefined vocabulary
is introduced to transform words within ti into one-hot codes
j
Oi = [oi1 , . . . , oli ] ∈ Rdo ×l , where oi indicates the jth word’s
one-hot representation and its dimension is do . Then, these
codes would be converted into the textual features GiE ∈
Rd×l by a learnable mapping matrix Etext ∈ Rd×do , which is

formulated as


GiE = Etext (Oi ) = ai1 , . . . , ali

(1)

j
where ai ∈ Rd×1 denotes the

jth word’s textual feature. Like
Bert, the obtained textual feature GiE would be attached with
a fixed text classification token a0 ∈ Rd×1 in this article. Also,
to eliminate the disturbances caused by the same words, the
pos
text positional matrix Gi ∈ Rd×(1+l) is added to GiE for
enriching the textual features. The above operations can be
defined as


pos
(2)
Gi′ = a0 , ai1 , . . . , ali + Gi .
Finally, the textual embeddings Gi = [g0 , gi1 , . . . , gli ] ∈
R
can be obtained by adding Gi′ and the text-type
type
identification matrix Gi , that is,
d×(1+l)

type

Gi = Gi

+ Gi′ .

(3)

type
Here, we set the token of Gi to be “0.”

2) Image Embedding Block: Inspired by ViT [26],
we develop a lightweight linear projector to generate the RS
image embeddings. For an RS image vi whose height, width,
and channel are H , W , and C, respectively, we first slice and
flatten it into n patches Pi = { pi1 , . . . , pin } ∈ R(h×w×C)×n ,
where h and w denote the heights and widths of patches,
respectively, and their values are the same in general. Then,
a learnable linear projection matrix Eimage ∈ Rd×(h×w×C) is
designed to map patches into d-dimensional visual features
FiE ∈ Rd×n . The formulation of this step is


FiE = Eimage (Pi ) = bi1 , . . . , bin
(4)
j

where bi ∈ Rd×1 means the jth RS patches’ visual feature.
Next, we concatenate FiE with an image classification token
bi0 ∈ Rd×1 and add the image positional embedding vector
pos
Fi ∈ Rd×(1+n) to improve the visual features with the image
structure information. This operation can be defined as
pos

Fi′ = [bi0 , bi1 , . . . , bin ] + Fi .

(5)

Finally, we can get the RS image embeddings Fi =
[f0 , fi1 , . . . , fin ] ∈ Rd×(1+n) by combining the enhanced visual
type
features Fi′ and the image-type identification matrix Fi , that
is,
type

Fi = Fi

+ Fi′ .

(6)

type
In this article, we set the token of Fi to be “1.”

C. Information Interacting-Enhancing Module
So far, we have obtained the textual and visual embeddings for the texts and RS images. Then, their relationships
should be mined intensely for CMRSITR. Also, the current
visual embeddings should be enhanced as they cannot fully
represent the complex contents within RS images. To achieve
these goals, we develop IIEM in this section. As shown in
Fig. 1, IIEM comprises three feature interacting-enhancing
(FIE) blocks, which are combined serially. Each of them
consists of an intermodality relationship interacting (IMRI)
subblock and a visual feature enhancing (VFE) subblock. Now,
we will explain them one by one. Since the operations of the
three FIE blocks are the same, we only use the first FIE block
as an example to illustrate clearly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

5611715

Fig. 1. Framework of the proposed IEFT. There are three main components, including an FEM, an IIEM, and an RM. FEM leverages the linear projector
and Bert to transform RS images and texts into d-dimensional visual and textual feature embeddings. IIEM aims to model intermodality relationships between
different features and enhance the visual feature representation simultaneously, achieved by the IMRI subblocks and VFE subblocks. RM encloses three
IMRI subblocks and an ITM head, focusing on further narrowing the semantic gaps between the two modalities and outputs matching scores that reflect the
C means we concatenate the image and text features into a joint feature, and ⃝
A indicates that we divide the joint
similarities of RS images and texts. Here, ⃝
feature into image and text features.

where Xiln specifies the normalized format of the input data that
is accomplished by the layer normalization operation LN(·),
E Q (·), E K (·), and EV (·) denote three projection matrixes that
map the normalized input data Xiln into queries, keys, and
values, dk indicates a scaled factor, and softmax(·) is the
softmax function. After h parallel SAMs, Xi is transformed
into {Si1 , . . . , Sih }. Then, by contacting them together and
applying a linear operation, the output of the MHA layer can
be obtained. This step can be expressed as


MHA Xiln = concat Si1 , . . . , Sih Eo
(8)

Fig. 2. Flowchart of FEM, which comprises an image embedding block
and a text embedding block. The image embedding block leverages a simple
linear projector to generate visual embeddings for RS images, while the
text embedding block adopts Bert to map texts into textual embeddings.
The different embeddings have the same dimensions, facilitating cross-modal
retrieval.

1) Intermodality Relationship Interacting Subblock: To
bridge the gap between the two modalities, we use a
transformer-encoder as our IMRI subblock, which contains an
MHA layer, two layer-norm layers, and a multilayer perception
(MLP). The residual connection integrates these components.
As shown in Fig. 3, the MHA aims at modeling the inherent
relationships between texts and RS images (spatialwise), while
the layer-norm layers and MLP focus on guaranteeing the
IMRI’s stability and improving its nonlinear fitness capacity.
For an input data Xi =[Gi , Fi ] ∈ Rd×(l+n+2) , it would be
normalized and passed through the MHA layer that mainly has
h SAM in parallel. SAM can leverage the vectors’ dependence
attention matrix to model the relationships between text and
RS image embeddings. It is accomplished by the scale dotproduction, whose formulation is
SAM Xiln




T !

E Q Xiln E K Xiln
√
EV Xiln
= softmax
dk
(7)

where concat(·) implies the contact operation and Eo means
the linear mapping. Next, the summation of MHA(Xiln ) and
Xi would be fed into the second layer-norm layer and MLP.
Here, the MLP contains two fully connected layers connected
by a Gaussian error linear unit (GeLU).
As a whole, for the input data Xi , the process IMRI
subblock can be formulated as
Xiln = LN(Xi )

Ximha = Xi + MHA Xiln
Xiimri = Ximha + MLP LN Ximha



(9)

where Ximha ∈ Rd×(l+n+2) indicates the output of the MHA
layer, MLP(·) means the operations of MLP, and Xiimri ∈
Rd×(l+n+2) denotes the output of the IMRI subblock.
2) Visual Feature-Enhancing Subblock: To enhance the
visual embeddings, we first split the visual component Ziv ∈
Rd×n from Xiimri according to the image-type identification.
The rest part is recorded Zio ∈ Rd×(l+2) . Then, it would be
fed into a channelwise feature-enhancing (CWFE) unit and a
localwise feature-enhancing (LWFE) unit orderly (see Fig. 1).
Like the proposed IMRI subblock, the base of the CWFE
unit (see Fig. 4) is also the transformer-encoder which focuses
on exploring the inner relationships hidden in the input data.
Nevertheless, the CWFE unit tends to capture the helpful
knowledge within RS images from the channel perspective.
Particularly, Ziv is first transformed into the channelwise feature matrix Ziv T ∈ Rn×d by the transpose operation. Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 3. (Left) Structure of the IMRI subblock, which incorporates the SAM to model the inherent relationships between the RS image and text modalities.
(Right) Schematic illustration of the goals of the IMRI subblock. The input data Xi is concatenated by the textual embeddings Gi = [g0 , gi1 , . . . , gli ] and
the visual embeddings Fi = [f0 , fi1 , . . . , fin ]. Here, we record each item in Gi as a word-perspective vector, which represents a word in this text. Besides,
each element within Fi is regarded as a spatial-perspective vector, which describes a patch obtained from the RS image. After passing Xi through the IMRI
subblock, the relations between word- and spatial-perspective vectors can be captured by SAM.

it would be passed through a normalization layer and a h-head
SAM to perform an attention mechanism for channelwise
relationships. The definitions of SAM can refer to (7) and (8).
Next, another normalization layer and an MLP layer are
applied. Note that the above two steps are connected in a
residual way. The above process can be formulated as


T
Ziln = LN Ziv T
 T
T
Zimha = Ziv T + MHA Ziln
 

T
T
T
Zicwfe = Zimha + MLP LN Zimha
(10)
T

where Ziln ∈ Rn×d denotes the normalized feature matrix,
T
Zimha ∈ Rn×d means the channelwise output of the MHA
T
layer, and Zicwfe ∈ Rn×d means the output of the CWFE unit.
The CWFE unit pays attention to exploiting the RS images’
contents from the global aspect. To discover the salient local
regions and enrich the visual embeddings, the LWFE unit with
the depthwise convolution [59] is developed here. In detail,
T
we first apply a transpose operation on Zicwfe to obtain
cwfe
d×n
layer,
Zi
∈ R . After passing through a normalization
√ √
we reshape it into the 2-D version Zi2−D ∈ Rd× n× n . Then,
two 1√ ×√1 convolutions are
to map Zi2−D into Ci1 ∈
√ adopted
√
du × n× n
2
du × n× n
R
and Ci ∈ R
in parallel. We formulate this
step as

up
Ci1 = E1 Zi2−D

up
(11)
Ci2 = E2 Zi2−D
up

up

where E1 (·) and E2 (·) denote two 1 × 1 convolutions. Note
that “up” means du > d. Next, we want to find the salient local
areas hidden in RS images. To achieve this goal, depthwise
convolution is adopted, which is good at capturing the local
structure of images by learning neighborhood information.
We apply a 3 × 3 depthwise convolution and a GeLU nonlinear activation to Ci1 for depressing the nonsalient backgrounds. Meanwhile, another 3 × 3 depthwise convolution is
conducted on Ci2 to highlight the salient regions. By producing

them in a√ dotted
manner, we can obtain the fused feature
√
Ci ∈ Rd× n× n , containing luxuriant local clues. The above
operations can be formulated as


Ci = φ Wd1 Ci1 × Wd2 Ci2
(12)
where Wd1 (·) and Wd2 (·) mean two 3 × 3 depthwise convolutions, and φ(·) represents the GeLU nonlinearity. Finally, a
1 × 1 convolution is used to reduce the channel numbers of
Ci and the output of the LWFE unit is
Ciout = Edown (Ci ) + Zi2−D

(13)

√ √
d× n× n

where Ciout ∈ R
.
After reshaping Ciout into Ziout ∈ Rd×n and contacting Ziout
and Zio , the contextualized feature Xiout(1) ∈ Rd×(n+l+2) of the
first FIE block can be generated. The other two FIE blocks
operate the same. In this way, we can get the output of IIEM
Xiout . Overall, the LWFE leverages the depthwise convolution
to capture localwise information and finally enhances our
model’s ability to discriminate nonsalient backgrounds and
salient regions.
D. Retrieval Module
So far, we have obtained Xiout , which is rich in intermodality
relationships and RS image contents. Now, RM is developed
to accomplish cross-modal retrieval.
As shown in Fig. 1, RM consists of three IMRI subblocks
and an ITM head. Their functions are further to explore the
relations between RS images and texts and to generate the
matching scores Si ∈ [0, 1] that are used to measure the similarities between RS images and texts. The larger scores, the
greater similarities between the RS images and texts. The
structure and process of the IMRI subblock can be found
in Section III-C1. After three IMRI subblocks, Xiout can be
f
transformed into Xi ∈ Rd×(l+n+2) . The ITM head consists of
a linear mapping Eitm (·), a nonlinear activation layer tanh(·),
and a matching score mapping Ematch (·). The matching scores
can be obtained by
f 
Si = Ematch tanh Eitm Xi
.
(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

5611715

Fig. 4. (Left) Structure of the CWFE unit, which tends to capture the helpful knowledge within RS images from the channel aspect. (Right) Schematic
illustration of the targets of the CWFE unit. When the visual component Ziv is input, we first transform it into Ziv T . Here, Ziv represents the RS images from
the spatial aspect as it is obtained by the RS patches. Thus, Ziv T reflects knowledge of the RS images from the channel dimension. Then, SAM is applied on
Ziv T to capture channelwise relationships hidden in RS images.

Fig. 5. Flowchart of the LWFE unit, which mainly incorporates a normalization layer, three 1 × 1 convolutions, two 3 × 3 depthwise convolutions,
and a GeLU activation function. The function of this unit is to enhance the
visual representation by mining salient local regions within RS images.

To train our IEFT using the obtained matching scores,
we first construct positive and negative samples for each RS
image. In particular, we treat an RS image and its paired texts
as positive samples. At the same time, the RS image and
λ random texts are regarded as negative samples. Then, the
cross-entropy loss function is selected to minimize the gaps
between Si and the relationship label m, that is,
Lmatching = CrossEntropy(Si , m).

(15)

In the testing stage, we first count the matching scores
between the query (an RS image or a text) and all candidates
(texts or RS images in the archive). Then, the retrieval list can
be determined in descending order of scores.
IV. E XPERIMENTS AND D ISCUSSION
A. Testing Datasets Introduction
Four popular RS image datasets are employed to evaluate
our IEFT, including the RSICD [60], RSITMD [16], UCMCaptions [61], and Sydney-Captions [61] datasets.
The RSICD dataset is a large-scale RS image caption
dataset, containing 10 921 RS images with varied pixel resolutions and fixed sizes (224 × 224). These RS images are
divided into 30 categories, and the number of RS images
per class varies from 240 to 1031. Also, each RS image

has five description sentences in RSICD. RSITMD is a
derivate of RSICD, with 4743 256 × 256 RS images. Parts
are selected from the RSICD dataset, and Google Earth
collects others. There are 32 classes in this dataset, and the
numbers of RS images within each class are imbalanced.
Like RSICD, each RS image in RSITMD has five textual
captions. The UCM-Captions dataset was constructed based
on the UC Merced Land Use dataset [62]. UCM-Captions
contains 2100 RS images and are divided into 21 semantic
classes equally. Their pixel resolutions and sizes are 1 ft and
256 × 256, respectively. Five texts are manually annotated to
describe a single RS image. It is noted that the descriptions for
the RS images from the same category are similar [60], which
enhances the difficulties of CMRSITR. The Sydney-Captions
dataset was released in [61], and the original version is the
Sydney dataset [63]. This dataset contains 613 RS images
with the size of 500 × 500, and every image has five captions.
Each image’s spatial resolution is approximately 0.5 m, and
all RS images are divided into seven semantic categories. The
detailed information related to RS images’ semantic categories
and their volumes of four datasets can be found in the second
section of the Supplementary Material.
B. Experimental Setting
1) Implementation Details: All experiments are carried out
on two NVIDIA RTXA6000 GPUs with 48 GB memory.
According to the JSON documents of four datasets, we set
the ratios of the training and testing sets are 90% and 10% for
different archives, respectively. In the training phase, we adopt
the AdamW optimizer with the initialized learning rate of
10−4 and weight decay of 10−2 to update the parameters of
our IEFT. The batch size equals 8 for all datasets, and the
epochs are 100 (Sydney-Captions and UCM-Captions) and
50 (RSICD and RSITMD), respectively. The learning rate
is warmed up at the beginning 10% of epochs, then decays
to zero linearly. The CWFE and LWFE units are initialized
randomly, and the ViLT’s pretrained parameters initialize the
other parts of our IEFT [64], [65], [66], [67]. Note that we

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE I
L ENGTH OF T EXTS ACROSS F OUR DATASETS

repeat the experiments five times, and the exhibited results in
this article are the average values.
For texts, we first splice the [cls] and [sep] at the beginning
and end of each text, respectively. Then, the lengths of texts
are normalized to 40, that is, l + 1 = 40. The reasons for
fixing the text length of 40 are twofold. The first one is the
specification of the pretrained parameters of ViLT [23]. The
ViLT is pretrained on millions of online image–text pairs data,
providing rich cross-modal information that can be leveraged
to enhance our model’s results. To keep consistency with
ViLT, we set the text length to 40. The second one is the
consideration of textual information integrity. After analyzing
the texts in four testing datasets (see Table I), we can find
that the length of texts varies from 20 to 34, and the average
length equals approximately 10. Based on these observations,
fixing the text length of 40 can guarantee the integrity of the
textual information. To normalize all texts’ length as 40 for our
model, we pad “0” at the end of the textual sequences. Here,
the “0” token has no semantic meaning. Besides, since the
predefined vocabulary (in Section III-B1) has 30 522 frequent
words [68], the dimension of texts’ one-hot codes are 30 522,
that is, do = 30 522.
For RS images, we first resize each RS image into
384 × 384 and slice it into n = 144 patches with the
size of 32 × 32. Then, the RandAugment [69] is applied to
augmented RS images without the color inversion and cutout.
In our IEFT, the dimensions of RS images and texts are varied
at different stages, and we set them d = 768 and du = 2042,
respectively. The numbers of SAMs in the IMRI subblock and
the CWFE unit are 12, that is, h = 12. Besides, the kernel size
of depthwise convolutions in the LWFE unit is set as 3.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To confirm the effectiveness of our
IEFT, we choose two widely used evaluation metrics as R@k
(where k = 1, 5, 10) and m R [10]. R@k is the ratio of
ground truth appearing in the retrieval results of top k. Note
that the ground truth shows the relationship label between
the image or text with the query. The relationship labels
equal to 1 means that the RS images and texts are positive
sample pairs. Otherwise, they are regarded as negative sample
pairs. To obtain the R@k, we should first obtain k image–text
relationship labels corresponding to the top k matching scores
between a query with all retrieval entities. Then we need
to identify how many positive samples appear in the top k
retrieval samples. Thus, the R@k can be defined as
B

R@k =

1 X
Precision(i, k)
B i=1

(16)

where B means the volume of the query set, i means the
ith query set, and Precision(i, k) denotes whether the positive items corresponding to ith query appear in the top

k retrieval samples or not. If the positive sample exists in
the top k retrieval results, Precision(i, k) = 1. Otherwise,
Precision(i, k) = 0. Furthermore, m R is the average of all
R@ks.
When we leverage the above assessment criteria to judge
the retrieval models, we found that the issue of duplicated
texts (a textual caption may appear in different RS images)
would impact them negatively. As shown in Fig. 6(a), there
are two RS images and their corresponding texts. It is easy to
find that the caption texts are duplicated. Logically speaking,
when we use “This is a dense forest” as the query, these two
RS images are both the correct “Image retrieval results”; or
when we use one of the two RS images as the query, the
“This is a dense forest” should be the correct “Text retrieval
results.” However, each text links an “Image Label” in the
dataset so that the sentence “This is a dense forest” will be
changed into two sentences “This is a dense forest. (Image
label1)” and “This is a dense forest. (Image label2)” When
we use “This is a dense forest. (Image label1)” as a query,
the second RS is regarded as an incorrect result. Similarly,
when we use the first RS image as the query, the “ This is a
dense forest. (Image label2)” would be deemed as an improper
retrieval result. The schematic illustration of this phenomenon
can be found in Fig. 6(b), which is somewhat unreasonable
and disturbs the credibility of R@ks and m R.
To overcome this dilemma, we develop a simple strategy to
improve the robustness of assessment criteria. In detail, we first
unify the texts in the dataset without duplication. Then, the
“Image Labels” corresponding to each text are counted. Thus,
one text may have several “Image Labels,” such as “This is a
dense forest: Related Image labels:1, 2.” Consequently, when
we use the above sentence as the query, the first and second
RS images are both the correct “Image retrieval results.” Also,
this sentence can be the right “Text retrieval result” for two
RS images. This process can be found in Fig. 6(c). In this
way, the obtained R@ks and m R values are more objective.
For clarity, we record two indicators I M R@k and I Mm R
in this article. In the following experiments, we use I M R@k
and I Mm R to count the numerical results. The Supplementary
Material will also summarize the original R@k and m R values
for reference.
C. Sensitivity Analysis
As mentioned in Section III-D, we should set the number
of negative texts λ before training the proposed IEFT. Thus,
in this section, we study its influence on IEFT and provide
the optimal values for different datasets. To this end, we vary
the values of λ from 11 to 19 with an interval of 2. Based on
different λ, we can train diverse IEFTs, and their performance
for four archives is displayed in Fig. 7. By observing them,
we can find that: 1) all IEFTs’ behavior is close to each other;
2) the values of the assessment criteria are enhanced gradually
at first and then descends to a degree; and 3) the peak values
for different datasets appear at λ = 15. The above investigation
confirms that introducing the negative texts into training is
necessary, which can make IEFT keep semantic consistency
reasonably. According to the contents discussed above, we set
λ = 15 for the following experiments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

5611715

Fig. 6. Examples illustrate the negative influence of duplicated texts and the operation of I M R@k and I Mm R. Here, (a) denotes two RS images with their
corresponding texts, (b) shows how duplicated texts negatively affect the results, and (c) illustrates the function of improved R@k and m R. Note that the
uncorrected results are marked in red.

Fig. 7. Illustration of influence of parameter λ on I M R@ks and I Mm Rs of four datasets. Here, (a) is the results of the RSICD dataset, (b) is the RSITMD
dataset, (c) is the UCM-Caption dataset, and (d) is the Sydney-Captions dataset.

D. Ablation Study
As exhibited in Fig. 1, our IEFT involves an FEM, an IIEM,
and an RM. Among the three modules, IIEM is the most
complex one. It consists of three FIE blocks, each of which
mainly contains an IMRI subblock and a VFE subblock. The
IMRI subblock aims at modeling the relationships between
RS images and texts by SAM. The VFE subblock focuses
on enhancing the RS images’ representations by exploring the
channelwise and localwise knowledge hidden in images, which
is achieved by the CWFE and LWFE units. We construct the
following four networks to study their contributions to the
proposed IEFT further.
1) Net-1: FEM + RM.
2) Net-2: FEM + three IMRIs + RM.

3) Net-3: FEM + (three IMRIs + CWFEs) + RM.
4) Net-4: FEM + (three IMRIs + CWFEs + LWFEs) +
RM.
Here, Net-1 only comprises an FEM and an RM. Based
on Net-1, Net-2 adds three IMRI subblocks between FEM
and RM. Then, Net-3 embeds the CWFE units into three
IMRI subblocks. Finally, Net-4 introduces the LWFE units
on the basis of Net-3. Actually, Net-4 is our IEFT. The
performance of the four networks is displayed in Table II.
Here, “Text Retrieval” denotes that we use RS images as
the queries to search the matched textual captions. While
“Image Retrieval” means the opposite scenario. Note that the
experimental settings are the same as the contents discussed
in Section IV-B1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE II
I M R@k AND I Mm R VALUES (%) OF F OUR A BLATION N ETWORKS C OUNTED ON D IFFERENT DATASETS

We can easily find that the values of all assessment criteria
are increased from Net-1 to Net-4. For example, compared
with Net-1, the significant enhancements in I Mm R achieved
by Net-4 are 10.06% (RSICD), 13.14% (RSITMD), 17.70%
(UCM-Captions), and 11.45% (Sydney-Captions). Taking the
“Image Retrieval” results of RSITMD as another example,
the improvements in I M R@10 obtained by Net-4 are 19.4%
(Net-1), 1.32% (Net-2), and 0.43% (Net-3), respectively. The
above discussion confirms the contributions of the IMRI
subblocks, CWFE units, and LWFE units to our IEFT. Furthermore, we can summarize three points from the results.
1) The distinct performance gaps between Net-1 and Net-2
indicate that the IMRI subblocks can effectively model
the relationships between RS images and texts. The
acceptance results of different CMRSITR tasks can be
generated based on those useful relationships. This also
implies the importance of relationship creation in the
cross-modal scenario.
2) After introducing the CWFE unit into Net-2, the behavior of Net-3 becomes stronger than that of Net-2. This
illustrates that the explored channelwise information is
helpful in RS image understanding. By supplementing the channelwise clues into the global features, the
obtained visual features are beneficial to describe the
complex contents within RS images and to establish
visual–textual relations.
3) When we add LWFE into Net-3, Net-4 produces the best
results, which demonstrates the usefulness of exploiting
the local information from RS images. Not only can
the discrimination of visual features be enhanced in this
way, but also the rich knowledge hidden in RS images
can be discovered. Therefore, we can get more credible
visual and textual relations for CMRSITR tasks.
To further study the effectiveness of the IMRI subblock,
we conduct the following experiments. In particular, we vary
the number of IMRI subblocks from 1 to 5 based on Net-2,
and the results counted on the four datasets are shown in
Fig. 8. By observing them, we can find that: 1) the I Mm R
values consistently rise as the number of IMRI subblocks
increases and 2) the most substantial improvements appear
when the number of the IMRI subblock changes from 2 to 3.
These imply the positive contributions of the IMRI subblock.
Also, the more IMRI subblocks, the stronger behavior of the
final network. Nevertheless, the cost of good performance

is a significant increase in time complexity. Considering the
tradeoff between the performance and time costs, we suggest
the number of the IMRI subblocks equals three.
E. Comparisons With Other Approaches
To comprehensively evaluate the retrieval performance of
the proposed IEFT, we compare it with the following models.
1) CLIP [70]: This model adopts the specific encoders to
map the different input data into a multimodal embedding space for image–text search tasks. The adopted
image encoders are ResNet50 [18] and ViT-B/32 [26],
and the selected text encoder is a 12-layer transformer [24]. We use ViT-B/32 and the 12-layer transformer in the following experiments to complete the data
embedding and cross-modal retrieval.
2) MSIT [11]: After obtaining the embeddings of RS
images and the corresponding textual captions, multiscale interactive transformer (MSIT) directly constructs
a single-branch transformer-based network to learn the
semantic relationships between them for CMRSITR.
Also, a lightweight multiscale feature exploration submodule is developed and embedded in MSIT to mine
the important local information hidden in RS images.
3) AMFMN [16]: AMFMN is a dual-branch network that
uses a DCNN to learn RS image features and a gate
recurrent unit (GRU) model to obtain text features.
Then, the visual-guided attention (VGA) module is
developed to narrow the semantic gap between visual
and textual features so that credible CMRSITR results
can be generated. AMFMN provides three different
attention operations, that is, soft attention, fusion attention, and similarity attention. In the following experiments, we record AMFMN with different attention
ways AMFMN-soft, AMFMN-fusion, and AMFMNsim, respectively.
4) LW-MCR [8]: Like AMFMN, a lightweight multiscale
crossmodal text-image retrieval method (LW-MCR) also
leverages a DCNN to learn the visual features from RS
images. Unlike AMFMN, LW-MCR adopts the group
convolution scheme to obtain the textual features. Then,
LW-MCR introduces knowledge distillation to achieve
satisfactory and efficient CMRSITR results. According to the knowledge distillation manner, two models
(LW-MCR-b and LW-MCR-d) are used in the following.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

5611715

Fig. 8.
I M R@ks and I Mm Rs values of Net-2 with different numbers of the IMRI subblocks. (a) RSICD. (b) RSITMD. (c) UCM-Captions.
(d) Sydney-Captions.

LW-MCR-b means that there is no other network during
the knowledge distillation, and LW-MCR-d indicates a
teacher network exists in the knowledge distillation.
5) GaLR [10]: A novel retrieval framework based on global
and local information (GaLR) first proposes a multilevel
information dynamic fusion (MIDF) scheme to explore
both the global and local information within RS images
and texts. Then, a multivariate rerank algorithm is developed to refine the cross-modal retrieval results.
Here, contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP) and
MSIT are transformer-based methods, and others are DCNNbased methods. We simulate CLIP and MSIT by ourselves, and
the DCNN-based methods are accomplished by the released
codes. All free parameters are set according to the original
literature, and the experimental settings are consistent with
ours. Among all compared methods, MSIT, LW-MCR, and
GaLR have some assistive designs or technologies. Hence,
we make some changes when we complete them in the
following experiments for fairness, which are given in detail.
1) MSIT has six transformer encoders in its main module
to learn the relations between RS images and texts.
However, IEFT only has three transformer encoders
(located in IIEM). Accordingly, we reduce the number
of transformer encoders in MSIT to three.
2) In LW-MCR, apart from the cross-modal learning network with a knowledge distillation strategy, the authors
introduce a large number of unlabeled RS images
collected from Google Earth to enhance the retrieval
performance. Nevertheless, the proposed IEFT does not
have any auxiliary information. Thus, in the following
experiments, we remove the unlabeled data learning part
from the main body of LW-MCR.
3) To explore the helpful information from RS images,
GaLR adopts object detection techniques. In addition,
a specific reranking scheme is added after the initial

retrieval to improve the final accuracy. Nonetheless, the
above techniques do not exist in the proposed IEFT.
Therefore, we discard object detection and image reranking when we complete GaLR.
1) Results of the RSICD Dataset: The RSICD dataset is the
largest among the four datasets, and the results of different
methods are shown in Table III. From the observation of
the results, we can find that all methods’ performance is
acceptable, and the behavior of the transformer-based methods
(CLIP, MSIT, and our IEFT) is stronger than that of the
DCNN-based models. This implies that the mechanism of the
transformer is beneficial to exploit the intermodality relationships between RS images and texts in RSICD, leading to the
small semantic gaps between the visual and textual features
and better CMRSITR results. Although the compared methods
achieve good results, the proposed IEFT outperforms them
in all cases. Taking I Mm R as examples, the enhancements
achieved by IEFT are 1.99% (over CLIP), 3.42% (over MSIT),
6.01% (over AMFMN-soft), 5.98% (over AMFMN-fusion),
5.67% (over AMFMN-sim), 8.75% (over LW-WCR-b), 7.70%
(over LW-MCR-d), and 5.87% (over GaLR). The reasons
behind this encouraging investigation are twofold. First, IEFT
processes RS image and text embeddings simultaneously,
which can mitigate the misaligned problem in multimodal
feature distributions. Second, owing to the specific structure of
the developed IIEM, not only the relations between RS images
and texts, but also the rich information hidden in RS images
can be explored. The positive results discussed above confirm
the usefulness of IEFT for the RSICD dataset.
2) Results of the RSITMD Dataset: The CMRSITR results
of different methods are summarized in Table III. Like
RSICD, our method achieves the best performance on the
RSITMD dataset. For example, in the “Image Retrieval”
scenario, the I M R@10 values of IEFT is 58.54%, whose

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE III
I M R@k AND I Mm R VALUES (%) OF D IFFERENT C OMPARISON M ETHODS C OUNTED ON D IFFERENT DATASETS

improvements compared with other methods are 14.36% (over
CLIP), 0.01% (over MSIT), 3.39% (over AMFMN-soft),
5.60% (over AMFMN-fusion), 2.68% (over AMFMN-sim),
4.51% (over LW-WCR-b), 8.45% (over LW-MCR-d), and
5.63% (over GaLR). For another example, in the “Text
Retrieval” scenario, the I M R@10 value of IEFT is 51.40%,
whose enhancements in comparison to other methods are
14.90% (over CLIP), 2.66% (over MSIT), 7.31% (over
AMFMN-soft), 8.49% (over AMFMN-fusion), 8.37% (over
AMFMN-sim), 14.02% (over LW-WCR-b), 11.80% (over LWMCR-d), and 8.48% (over GaLR). These promising results
illustrate that our IEFT is helpful to the RSITMD dataset.
A notable observation is that the behavior of CLIP is the
weakest. The main reasons behind this phenomenon are as
follows. First, CLIP is developed for natural images and
ignores the characteristics of RS images (such as multiscale).
Second, since the volume of samples in RSITMD is not
big enough, the pretrained parameters of CLIP cannot be
optimized to the ideal state. This significant change implies the
importance of considering RS scenes’ specific characteristics.
3) Results of the UCM-Captions Dataset: The diverse
methods’ CMRSITR results are exhibited in Table III. Similar
to the results of RSICD and RSITMD, IEFT is the best among
all methods. For I Mm R, our IEFT achieves 77.38%, which is
22.10%, 6.61%, 8.37%, 8.11%, 6.43%, 12.61%, 12.26%, and
17.36% higher than CLIP, MSIT, AMFMN-soft, AMFMNfusion, AMFMN-sim, LW-WCR-b, LW-WCR-d, and GaLR,
respectively. Also, the biggest improvements of I M R@10 are
as high as 14.36% and 14.90% in the “Image Retrieval”
and “Text Retrieval” cases, respectively. Those observations
confirm the effectiveness of the proposed IEFT again. We are
pleasantly surprised to note that the enhancements achieved by
our method on the UCM dataset are more distinct than RSICD
and RSITMD. This is largely due to the following reasons.
On the one hand, compared with the other two datasets, the
number of RS images per category in the UCM dataset is
balanced, which is helpful to our IEFT sufficiently modeling

relationships between RS images and their corresponding
texts. On the other hand, besides exploring the relations
between the different data, IEFT focuses on capturing the
complex contents within RS from different aspects, which is
conducive to CMRSITR tasks directly.
4) Results of the Sydney-Captions Dataset: The results of
various methods are exhibited in Table III. Not surprisingly,
the performance of IEFT ranks first among all methods.
For “Image Retrieval,” the I M R@k values of IEFT are
approximately 1.05 (I M R@1), 1.01 (I M R@5), and 1.00
(I M R@10) times as many as that of the second places
(CLIP, LW-WCR-d, and LW-WCR-b). Similarly, for “Text
Retrieval,” the I M R@k values of IEFT are approximately
1.01 (I M R@1), 1.04 (I M R@5), and 1.01 (I M R@10) times
as many as that of the second places (MIST). As a whole,
compared to the second place (MSIT), the I Mm R value IEFT
is 1.05 times as many as that of MSIT. These positive results
confirm the superiorities of our IEFT again.
Apart from the above numerical results, we also: 1) study
the IEFT’s performance across the different categories in
different datasets; 2) analyze the IEFT’s behavior under the
noisy scenario (i.e., there are some negative words in the
caption sentences); and 3) provide visual retrieval examples.
From observing those results, we can find that our IEFT can
still perform well. Detailed information can be found in the
Supplementary Material.
F. Time Cost Discussion
In this section, we study the efficiency of our method by
counting its inference times and parameter size.
For inference times, we randomly select an RS image (or
a text) to be the query and retrieve the corresponding texts
(or RS images) from the testing set using the trained IEFT.
The results (averaged values of ten random experiments) are
exhibited in Table IV. The inference times of the other seven
compared methods are also reported for reference. Note that
the experimental settings of different methods are the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

TABLE IV
R ETRIEVAL E FFICIENCY OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS (U NIT: S ECOND )

5611715

length of input tokens gradually [73]; and 3) altering the
attention mechanism by the spatial reduction attention (such
as PVTv2 [74]). Solving this shortcoming and balancing our
model’s inference times and performance are our future works.
V. C ONCLUSION

TABLE V
PARAMETERS VOLUME OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS (U NIT: M ILLIONS )

as Table III. By observing those results, we can find that
the inference times of all methods stay within a reasonable
range. Nevertheless, due to the MHA mechanism, the time
costs of the transform-based methods (CLIP, MSIT, and IEFT)
are longer than that of DCNN-based models (AMFMN-soft,
AMFMN-fusion, AMFMN-sim, LW-MCR, and GaLR). The
most time-saving model is LW-MCR, while our IEFT is the
most time-consuming model. The reason behind this investigation can be summarized as follows. The essential part of
our IEFT is the transformer encoder, which contains multiple
SAMs to explore the relations between RS images and texts.
The time complexity of these SAMs is high, so the time costs
of the proposed network are relatively high. Fortunately, the
distinct performance gaps between IEFT and other methods
(especially the DCNN-based models) illustrate that the extra
time is well spent.
The parameter volume of different models is displayed
in Table V. By observing the results, we find that the
transformer-based models (CLIP, MSIT, and IEFT) are heavier than the DCNN-based methods (AMFMN, LW-WCR,
and GaLR). This is because the transformer encoder has
more parameters compared with components within DCNN.
Besides, IEFT is lighter than CLIP but heavier than MSIT.
The reasons are that CLIP has more transformer encoders than
IEFT, and IEFT’s feature learning module (i.e., IIEM) is larger
than MSIT’s feature extract part. This investigation means the
proposed IEFT is not the largest one, at least. In addition,
the parameter sizes of different parts within our IEFT are
25.83 million (FEM), 52.32 million (IIEM), and 21.97 million
(RM).
A notable observation is that although IEFT is not the
heaviest model, its inference times are the longest. This is
due to the CWFE unit embedded in IIEM. As mentioned in
Section III-C2, CWFE tends to capture the helpful knowledge
within RS images from the channel aspect. To this end,
it would transpose the input feature map and then apply SAM.
Since the number of channels is always large, the computational complexity of CWFE would be expensive. The possible
solutions for this limitation are: 1) using sparse learning [71],
[72] to optimize the attention mechanism; 2) decreasing the

This article proposes an IEFT model to accomplish the
CMRSITR task. It regards the RS images and texts as a whole
and processes them simultaneously, which can effectively
learn multimodel features and directly align their cross-modal
semantic relationships. After mapping RS images and texts
into the feature embeddings, IEFT first uses IIEM to deeply
study the cross-modal data’s similarity relations (IMRI). Also,
the visual features are enhanced in IIEM through a channelwise process (CWFE) and a localwise operation (LWFE).
Then, the RM is developed and embedded at the top of our
model to model the resemblance relationships further and
produce the matching scores. Finally, the cross-modal retrieval
results can be decided by those scores. The positive experimental results counted on four public datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of IEFT.
Although the IEFT’s performance is well, there is still
room for improvement. First, the IEFT only emphasizes the
intermodal similarities or differences when it studies the
cross-modal relationships. However, the intermodal affinity is
ignored. Another deficiency of IEFT is the relatively high time
complexity. Our future work will focus on these two points to
optimize.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Gu, Y. Wang, and Y. Li, “A survey on deep learning-driven remote
sensing image scene understanding: Scene classification, scene retrieval
and scene-guided object detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 10, p. 2110,
May 2019.
[2] G. Cheng, X. Xie, J. Han, L. Guo, and G. Xia, “Remote sensing
image scene classification meets deep learning: Challenges, methods,
benchmarks, and opportunities,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 13, pp. 3735–3756, 2020.
[3] I. Kotaridis and M. Lazaridou, “Remote sensing image segmentation
advances: A meta-analysis,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 173, pp. 309–322, Mar. 2021.
[4] Y. Li, J. Ma, and Y. Zhang, “Image retrieval from remote sensing big
data: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 94–115, Mar. 2021.
[5] X. Tang, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Unsupervised deep feature
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 8,
p. 1243, Aug. 2018.
[6] C. Liu, J. Ma, X. Tang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Deep hash
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3420–3443, Apr. 2021.
[7] X. Tang et al., “Meta-hashing for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–19, 2021.
[8] Z. Yuan et al., “A lightweight multi-scale crossmodal text-image retrieval
method in remote sensing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
pp. 1–19, 2021.
[9] Q. Cheng, Y. Zhou, P. Fu, Y. Xu, and L. Zhang, “A deep semantic
alignment network for the cross-modal image-text retrieval in remote
sensing,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14,
pp. 4284–4297, 2021.
[10] Z. Yuan et al., “Remote sensing cross-modal text-image retrieval based
on global and local information,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5620616.
[11] Y. Wang, J. Ma, M. Li, X. Tang, X. Han, and L. Jiao, “Multiscale interactive transformer for remote sensing cross-modal image-text
retrieval,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp., Jul. 2022,
pp. 839–842.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5611715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

[12] X. Tang et al., “An unsupervised remote sensing change detection
method based on multiscale graph convolutional network and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–15,
2021.
[13] Y. Yang et al., “AR2 Det: An accurate and real-time rotational one-stage
ship detector in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–14, 2021.
[14] X. Tang et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on 3-D
octave convolution with spatial–spectral attention network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2430–2447, Mar. 2021.
[15] Y. Liu, Q. Li, Y. Yuan, Q. Du, and Q. Wang, “ABNet: Adaptive balanced
network for multiscale object detection in remote sensing imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–14, 2021.
[16] Z. Yuan et al., “Exploring a fine-grained multiscale method for crossmodal remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4404119.
[17] Y. Lv, W. Xiong, X. Zhang, and Y. Cui, “Fusion-based correlation
learning model for cross-modal remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[18] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[19] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[20] F. Faghri, D. J. Fleet, J. R. Kiros, and S. Fidler, “VSE++:
Improving visual-semantic embeddings with hard negatives,” 2017,
arXiv:1707.05612.
[21] C. Feichtenhofer et al., “Masked autoencoders as spatiotemporal
learners,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
pp. 35946–35958.
[22] X. Li et al., “OSCAR: Object-semantics aligned pre-training for visionlanguage tasks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2020, pp. 121–137.
[23] W. Kim, B. Son, and I. Kim, “ViLT: Vision-and-language transformer
without convolution or region supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2021, pp. 5583–5594.
[24] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[25] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[26] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[27] B. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kang, E. Kim, and H. J. Kim, “HOTR: End-toend human-object interaction detection with transformers,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 74–83.
[28] N. Wang, W. Zhou, J. Wang, and H. Li, “Transformer meets tracker:
Exploiting temporal context for robust visual tracking,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 1571–1580.
[29] Z. Jiang, Z. Xiang, J. Xu, and M. Zhao, “LGT-Net: Indoor panoramic
room layout estimation with geometry-aware transformer network,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 1644–1653.
[30] Y.-C. Chen et al., “UNITER: Universal image-text image representation
learning,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Glasgow, U.K.:
Springer, Aug. 2020, pp. 104–120.
[31] S. Li, T. Xiao, H. Li, W. Yang, and X. Wang, “Identity-aware textualvisual matching with latent co-attention,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 1908–1917.
[32] J. Gu, J. Cai, S. Joty, L. Niu, and G. Wang, “Look, imagine and match:
Improving textual-visual cross-modal retrieval with generative models,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 7181–7189.
[33] M. Żelaszczyk and J. Mańdziuk, “Cross-modal text and visual generation: A systematic review. Part 1: Image to text,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 93,
pp. 302–329, May 2023.
[34] Q. You, J. Luo, and Z. Zhang, “End-to-end convolutional semantic
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2018, pp. 5735–5744.
[35] L. Zhen, P. Hu, X. Wang, and D. Peng, “Deep supervised cross-modal
retrieval,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 10386–10395.

[36] Z. Zheng, L. Zheng, M. Garrett, Y. Yang, M. Xu, and Y.-D. Shen, “Dualpath convolutional image-text embeddings with instance loss,” ACM
Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1–23,
May 2020.
[37] C. Wang, L. Li, C. Yan, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, and J. Zhang, “Cross-modal
semantic correlation learning by Bi-CNN network,” IET Image Process.,
vol. 15, no. 14, pp. 3674–3684, Dec. 2021.
[38] Z. Ji, H. Wang, J. Han, and Y. Pang, “SMAN: Stacked multimodal
attention network for cross-modal image–text retrieval,” IEEE Trans.
Cybern., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 1086–1097, Feb. 2022.
[39] K.-H. Lee, X. Chen, G. Hua, H. Hu, and X. He, “Stacked cross attention
for image-text matching,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV),
2018, pp. 201–216.
[40] Y. Huang, Q. Wu, C. Song, and L. Wang, “Learning semantic concepts
and order for image and sentence matching,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6163–6171.
[41] K. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Li, Y. Li, and Y. Fu, “Visual semantic reasoning
for image-text matching,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 4653–4661.
[42] X. Xu, T. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Zuo, F. Shen, and H. T. Shen, “Crossmodal attention with semantic consistence for image–text matching,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 5412–5425,
Dec. 2020.
[43] K. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Li, Y. Li, and Y. Fu, “Image-text embedding learning
via visual and textual semantic reasoning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 641–656, Jan. 2023.
[44] J. Lu, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and S. Lee, “ViLBERT: Pretraining taskagnostic visiolinguistic representations for vision-and-language tasks,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–11.
[45] J. Li, R. Selvaraju, A. Gotmare, S. Joty, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi,
“Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with
momentum distillation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), vol. 34, 2021, pp. 9694–9705.
[46] G. Mikriukov, M. Ravanbakhsh, and B. Demir, “Unsupervised contrastive hashing for cross-modal retrieval in remote sensing,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022,
pp. 4463–4467.
[47] A. Radford et al., “Improving language understanding by generative pretraining,” Tech. Rep., 2018.
[48] A. Radford et al., “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog, vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[49] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc.
Adv. Neur. Inf. Process. Sys., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
[50] S. Khan, M. Naseer, M. Hayat, S. W. Zamir, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah,
“Transformers in vision: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54,
no. 10s, pp. 1–41, Jan. 2022.
[51] Y. Bazi, L. Bashmal, M. M. A. Rahhal, R. A. Dayil, and N. A. Ajlan,
“Vision transformers for remote sensing image classification,” Remote
Sens., vol. 13, no. 3, p. 516, Feb. 2021.
[52] P. Lv, W. Wu, Y. Zhong, F. Du, and L. Zhang, “SCViT: A spatialchannel feature preserving vision transformer for remote sensing image
scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 4409512.
[53] J. Ma, M. Li, X. Tang, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Homo–
heterogenous transformer learning framework for RS scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 2223–2239, 2022.
[54] X. Tang, M. Li, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “EMTCAL:
Efficient multiscale transformer and cross-level attention learning for
remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5626915.
[55] Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Xiong, and Y. Yuan, “Hybrid feature aligned
network for salient object detection in optical remote sensing imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5624915.
[56] D. Hong et al., “SpectralFormer: Rethinking hyperspectral image classification with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
pp. 1–15, 2021.
[57] Q. Li, R. Zhong, X. Du, and Y. Du, “TransUNetCD: A hybrid transformer network for change detection in optical remote-sensing images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5622519.
[58] L. Ding et al., “Looking outside the window: Wide-context transformer for the semantic segmentation of high-resolution remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 4410313.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: IEFT FOR CROSS-MODAL REMOTE-SENSING IMAGE AND TEXT RETRIEVAL

[59] S. W. Zamir, A. Arora, S. Khan, M. Hayat, F. S. Khan, and M. Yang,
“Restormer: Efficient transformer for high-resolution image restoration,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 5718–5729.
[60] X. Lu, B. Wang, X. Zheng, and X. Li, “Exploring models and data for
remote sensing image caption generation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2183–2195, Apr. 2018.
[61] B. Qu, X. Li, D. Tao, and X. Lu, “Deep semantic understanding of
high resolution remote sensing image,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Inf.
Telecommun. Syst. (CITS), Jul. 2016, pp. 1–5.
[62] Y. Yang and S. Newsam, “Bag-of-visual-words and spatial extensions
for land-use classification,” in Proc. 18th SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv.
Geographic Inf. Syst., Nov. 2010, pp. 270–279.
[63] F. Zhang, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Saliency-guided unsupervised feature
learning for scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2175–2184, Apr. 2015.
[64] T.-Y. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014,
pp. 740–755.
[65] R. Krishna et al., “Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using
crowdsourced dense image annotations,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 123,
no. 1, pp. 32–73, May 2017.
[66] V. Ordonez, G. Kulkarni, and T. Berg, “Im2Text: Describing images
using 1 million captioned photographs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 24, 2011, pp. 1–9.
[67] P. Sharma, N. Ding, S. Goodman, and R. Soricut, “Conceptual captions:
A cleaned, hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image
captioning,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
2018, pp. 2556–2565.
[68] Y. Wu et al., “Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the
gap between human and machine translation,” 2016, arXiv:1609.08144.
[69] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Randaugment: Practical
automated data augmentation with a reduced search space,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW),
Jun. 2020, pp. 3008–3017.
[70] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021,
pp. 8748–8763.
[71] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, “Generating long
sequences with sparse transformers,” 2019, arXiv:1904.10509.
[72] L. Fan et al., “Embracing single stride 3D object detector with sparse
transformer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 8448–8458.
[73] Z. Dai, G. Lai, Y. Yang, and Q. Le, “Funnel-Transformer: Filtering out
sequential redundancy for efficient language processing,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 4271–4282, 2020.
[74] W. Wang et al., “PVT v2: Improved baselines with pyramid vision
transformer,” Comput. Vis. Media, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 415–424, Sep. 2022.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuits
and systems from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery at the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently an Associate Professor with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University.
His research interests include remote-sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remotesensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, refer to
https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/.

5611715

Yijing Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.E. degree in intelligent science and
technology from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2021, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and technology with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding of the Ministry of Education.
Her research interests include cross-modal remotesensing image and text retrieval, remote-sensing
image processing, and deep learning.

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include computational
intelligence and image understanding.

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is currently a Professor with the Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine
learning, and remote-sensing image analysis and understanding.
Fang Liu (Member, IEEE) was born in China in
1990. She received the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Henan University,
Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in
intelligent information processing from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently a Lecturer with the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
Her research interests include deep learning, object
detection, polarimetric SAR image classification,
and change detection.
Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education of China. He has authored
or coauthored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include
signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet
theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is also a member of the IEEE Xian Section Executive Committee
and an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:57:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

