IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5647614

Language-Guided Progressive Query Refinement
With Diffusion Model for Visual Grounding on
Remote Sensing Images
Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, Ruitao Shen , Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Licheng Jiao , Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Remote sensing visual grounding (RSVG) is a lively
research topic in the RS community. Due to the superior performance of transformers in cross-modal interaction and alignment,
they have dominated the RSVG community, and numerous
transformer-based methods have been developed. Although they
have achieved success in various applications, their performance
in visual and textual feature alignment still does not reach the
level we expected. In addition, these methods place relatively
limited emphasis on bounding box coordinate generation, where
directly predicting coordinates through a decoder and grounding
head can result in suboptimal localization accuracy. To overcome
the above limitations, this article presents a new RSVG method,
named language-guided progressive query refinement with diffusion model for visual grounding (LPQR-DVG). It contains a
multiscale text-guided feature learning module (MTFLM) and an
iterative query localization module (IQLM). MTFLM integrates
text guidance into all stages of the visual feature extraction
process through cross-attention layers, effectively incorporating
textual information into the visual representation. In this way,
text-aware visual features can be effectively obtained, which
facilitates cross-modal interaction and target localization. IQLM
improves cross-modal feature alignment and iterative target
localization by introducing an RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net
with progressive query refinement (PQR) units. Through the
PQR units in IQLM, visual and text features are progressively
aligned via multiple rounds of interaction, enabling the query to
capture the target information referred to by the text gradually.
Finally, a diffusion-based iterative training strategy is introduced
to help LPQR-DVG map the random bounding box coordinates
into the final predictions progressively. The encouraging results
counted on the DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG datasets confirm
the effectiveness of LPQR-DVG. Our source codes are available
at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/LPQR-DVG
Received 14 July 2025; revised 8 October 2025; accepted 13 October 2025.
Date of publication 16 October 2025; date of current version 30 October 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62571387 and Grant 62276197, in part by the Key
Research and Development Program of Shaanxi under Grant 2024GX-YBXM125, in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi under
Grant 2024JC-YBMS-472, and in part by Shaanxi Province Innovation Capability Support Plan under Grant 2023-CX-TD-09. (Corresponding authors:
Xu Tang; Jingjing Ma.)
Xu Tang, Ruitao Shen, Jingjing Ma, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of
the Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com; jjma@ieee.org).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing 210094, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2025.3622554, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3622554

Index Terms—Diffusion model, language guidance, progressive
reasoning, remote sensing (RS), visual grounding.

I. I NTRODUCTION
EMOTE sensing visual grounding (RSVG) is a lively
research topic in the RS community. It focuses on
localizing the referred objects within RS images according
to the textual descriptions [1], [2], which can be viewed as
an extension of RS object detection [3]. Recently, RSVG
has received growing attention owing to the following reasons. On the one hand, understanding RS images at the
scene level becomes increasingly important as the resolution
increases [4], [5], [6]. Detecting and locating the specific
objects within RS images is an essential component of
scene interpretation. On the other hand, the development
of cross-modal learning techniques provides favorable conditions for RSVG [7], [8], [9]. Therefore, RSVG plays an
essential role in many applications, such as image retrieval
[10], [11], [12], [13], scene classification [14], [15], [16],
[17], hyperspectral image classification [18], [19], visual
question answering [20], [21], and semantic segmentation
[22], [23].
The first RSVG method may be the GeoVG proposed
in [24]. It contains a text encoder, an image encoder with
adaptive region attention, and a fusion module. They focus on
learning textual features with the consideration of geospatial
relationships, extracting rich visual features, and fully integrating the textual and visual features. By combining them, the
positive results can be achieved. Inspired by GeoVG, many
RSVG models have been proposed [1], [2], [3], [25]. Most
are accustomed to using visual convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and language networks [3] to extract visual and textual
features from RS images and textual descriptions. Then, they
establish relationships between the visual and textual information by specific schemes, such as multiscale cross-attention
[1], [2] and multistage synergistic aggregation [25], to achieve
the localization of specific targets. Like the standard crossmodal technologies, RSVG needs to align visual and textual
features for the final results. Unlike common cross-modal
approaches, RSVG places equal emphasis on object- and
scene-level clues, emphasizing the need for object recognition
and understanding.
Despite the remarkable results of previous works, challenges still deserve further research. First, due to the specific
characteristics of RSVG, the expected visual features should

R

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

contain crucial textual clues hidden in descriptions. Nevertheless, previous methods [2], [25] always explore visual and
textual features separately but overlook mining the mutual
influence between them. Although some works (e.g., [1])
have attempted to use textual features to assist in learning
visual features, the results often fall short of our expectations
due to the issue of feature misalignment. Second, generating exact bounding boxes does not receive the attention
it deserves. Directly regressing target bounding boxes by a
once-for-all decoder and a grounding head may result in
an inadequate understanding of the semantic information,
leading to mislabeling or missed detections [1], [2], [25].
Some approaches (e.g., [3]) have proposed more effective
bounding box regression methods; however, they primarily
focus on visual understanding and overlook the uniqueness
of RSVG, especially in terms of textual information comprehension. Last but not least, mining interactions between
visual and text features during the target localization is
insufficient. This would lead to the imprecise alignment of
text-referred objects and introduce ambiguity in target localization. Achieving comprehensive alignment between visual
and textual features to enable precise localization of textspecified targets remains a fundamental challenge in RSVG
tasks.
To address the challenges mentioned above, this article
proposes a new RSVG method named the language-guided
progressive query refinement with diffusion model for visual
grounding (LPQR-DVG). It mainly contains a multiscale textguided feature learning module (MTFLM) and an iterative
query localization module (IQLM). MTFLM aims to obtain
visual features that perceive textual messages, which enclose a
textual backbone, a text-guided visual feature learning block,
and a transformer encoder. Their functions are to learn text
features, mine text-aware visual features, and capture global
contexts within RS images and text descriptions. IQLM is
developed to generate accurate bounding boxes and thoroughly
complete the visual–text interaction for detecting and locating
explicit targets. To these ends, IQLM introduces a RSVGoriented reversed U-Net with progressive query refinement
(PQR) units. Through constant interaction among queries,
visual and text features, comprehensive visual–text alignment,
and accurate localization, corresponding to textual descriptions
can be achieved. Finally, to ensure the queries comprehensively integrate both visual and textual information, we
introduce a progressive diffusion learning strategy that continuously refines target localization through multistep denoising.
The main contributions of this article are summarized as
follows.
1) A new RSVG method named LPQR-DVG is proposed.
By incorporating text-guided learning during the visual
feature extraction stage and introducing query refinement cross-attention, our method progressively aligns
visual and textual features. Furthermore, by employing
the diffusion paradigm to refine localization iteratively,
accurate identification of text-referred targets can be
achieved.
2) The MTFLM module is introduced to provide sufficient text guidance throughout the visual feature
extraction process for detailed visual–text understanding.

Specifically, we project text features into multiscale
visual feature learning, enabling cross-attention interaction between text and visual features at different
spatial resolutions. This way, visual features can capture
semantic information that is more closely related to
textual descriptions, allowing for more accurate object
localization.
3) The IQLM module, composed of RSVG-oriented
reversed U-Net with PQR units, is introduced to accomplish cross-modal feature alignment and iterative target
localization jointly. PQR units can not only integrate
textual and visual information into the queries through
cross-modal interaction, but also thoroughly align visual
and text features at each unit. Thus, the queries can
sufficiently capture the target information in the visual
features referred to by the text.
4) The progressive diffusion learning strategy is employed
to train our model and ensure the accuracy of the
results. Specifically, the strategy progressively denoises
the random bounding box coordinates through iterative interactions with visual and textual features in
the RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net. Through iterative
denoising steps, the random coordinates can gradually transfer to semantically relevant regions, ultimately
generating precise target coordinates as the final
prediction.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Visual Grounding in Natural Scenes
The existing natural VG models can generally be classified
into two- and one-stage methods. Two-stage methods [26],
[27] typically employ an object detector first to identify
multiple candidate boxes in a natural image. Then, the optimal
box will be selected by the ranking schemes according to
the textural information, thereby localizing the target objects.
For example, Yang et al. [26] proposed a dynamic graph
attention network for VG. First, it obtains multiple object
features in an image by using ground truth objects and an
image backbone or employing a pre-trained object detector
to detect objects. Meanwhile, text features are obtained from
word embedding. Then, a dynamic graph attention network
is used to build a graph with objects and their relationships,
incorporating the object information and relations described
in the text into the graph. Finally, the target is selected by
computing the matching scores between each object and the
textual expressions.
In contrast, one-stage approaches directly estimate the positions of the referring objects without generating a set of
candidate regions. Initially, CNNs were popular due to their
strong feature learning capacity. These CNN-based models
integrate an object detector with a carefully designed VG
module [28], [29], [30], [31]. They use text encoders and
CNNs to facilitate cross-modal interaction between visual
and text features. For instance, to better understand spatial
positional relationships in textual information, Huang et al.
[29] proposed LBYL-Net. It uses pre-trained visual and text
encoders to extract visual and text features, followed by
a fusion module with an affine transformation on visual

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: LANGUAGE-GUIDED PROGRESSIVE QUERY REFINEMENT WITH DIFFUSION MODEL

features guided by text to perform cross-model interaction.
Then, a landmark feature convolution module is introduced
to integrate contextual information and gather visual features
from different directions. Finally, a localization module with
a detection head is used to localize the target. Subsequently,
owing to the ability in long-distance relationship capture and
cross-model learning, the transformer became popular in VG
tasks [32], [33], [34]. Yang et al. [35] proposed a VG model
named VLTVG. It first leverages the normal transformerbased visual and textual encoders to map images and texts
into the visual and textual embeddings. Then, based on the
multihead self-attention mechanism, a visual-linguistic verification module, a language-guided context encoder, and a
multistage cross-modal decoder are developed to generate textconditioned visual features and achieve the target localization.
Another set of transformer-based methods was introduced in
[36] and [37], which view VG as a direct set prediction
problem [38]. Like VLTVG, they adopt transformers to capture
valuable visual and textual representations and mine their
relations. Unlike VLTVG, they complete the target location
using random and multiple query strategies. Recently, diffusion
models [39] have attracted researchers’ attention since their
paradigm enables iterative reasoning for visual–text feature
alignment as well as progressive target localization [40], [41].
Chen and Li [41] applied generative diffusion models to VG
and proposed a language-guided diffusion model, LG-DVG.
It incorporates iterative visual–text reasoning and alignment
while progressively refining bounding boxes for query-region
matching. LD-DVG performs object localization by denoising
a set of noisy boxes generated by the visual encoder. These
boxes interact with text features extracted by the text encoder,
progressively denoise and localize the target object.
B. RS Visual Grounding
Current research on RSVG predominantly focuses on onestage approaches. Sun et al. [24] first introduced VG into the
RS community. Considering the differences between RS and
natural images, they first collected a dataset for RSVG tasks.
Then, a convolutional-based model, GeoVG, was developed to
achieve target localization. Given complex geographical spatial
relationships and the absence of visually prominent objects
in RS images, GeoVG achieves better localization of RS
images through a language encoder with a geospatial relation
graph, a visual encoder with large-scale region attention, and a
fusion module to localize targets. Another dataset (i.e., DIORRSVG) was constructed in [2]. Compared with the above
dataset, the RS images within DIOR-RSVG have higher spatial
resolution. Also, the volume of DIOR-RSVG is larger. Also,
a transformer-based method named MGVLF was proposed in
this work to address the challenges of large-scale variations,
cluttered backgrounds, and significant scale changes in RS
images. First, multiscale visual features and text features are
extracted from pre-trained visual and text encoders. Following
this, MGVLF employs cross-modal and self-attention transformers to enable interaction between multiscale visual and
textual features while filtering out irrelevant noise to learn
more discriminative representations. A fusion transformer and
a localization module are further introduced to obtain the
predicted target location. Although MGVLF performs well,

5647614

the insufficient feature interactions and inaccurate coordinate
predictions still weaken its behavior. As a result, Li et al. [1]
proposed a new transformer-based model called LPVA. Apart
from multiscale visual–text alignment after feature extraction,
it also pays attention to the interaction between visual and
text features during the feature extraction process, where text
features are introduced to progressively refine visual features
in the visual backbone through an attention module. After
that, a multilevel feature enhancement decoder is adopted to
perform visual–text interaction and fusion and achieve target
localization through a localization module.
The above transformer-based methods focus on the design
of visual–text alignment modules. However, they are not good
at learning the target-oriented positional representation. To
mitigate this issue, Lan et al. [3] proposed LQVG, inspired by
DETR [38], which has a query-based transformer framework.
It first extracts multiscale visual and text features using pretrained image and text encoders, respectively. Subsequently, a
multiscale cross-modal alignment module is developed to align
visual and text features at different scales. Next, sentencelevel text features are used as language queries to retrieve and
aggregate the referred object representation from multiscale
visual features in the transformer decoder. Finally, a localization module transforms these queries into target coordinates
and category information. Meanwhile, considering the single
fusion strategy in RSVG may limit the model’s ability to
learn the complex associations between textual semantics and
multiscale visual information, a new model named MSAM was
developed in [25], in which a generative paradigm is harnessed
to directly generate a discrete sequence of coordinates in an
auto-regressive manner.
C. Distinctive Features of LPQR-DVG
The key ideas of our work are the introduction of language
information and the diffusion module. Many methods have
been proposed based on these two techniques, such as [1], [2],
[3], [25], [41], and [42]. However, the proposed LPQR-DVG
differs from them and has many of its own properties. For
the inclusion of linguistic clues, the main difference between
LPQR-DVG and the existing ones is the way of utilizing
the textual knowledge. Differing from [1], which relies on
generating language-adaptive weights and biases to guide
visual feature extraction, and unlike [2] and [3], which exclude
entirely textual messages during the visual feature extraction
stage, our LPQR-DVG introduces MTFLM to achieve deeper
visual–textual interaction during the visual feature extraction
stage. Specifically, MTFLM projects textual features into each
layer of the visual feature extractor, followed by direct interaction through cross-attention mechanisms. Subsequently, IQLM
and the diffusion paradigm are incorporated to enable visual
features to progressively adapt to target locations specified by
the text, thereby achieving precise localization. In this manner,
not only can the visual representations be learned with the
guidance of textual clues, but also the final localization results
are sensitive to textual descriptions.
Existing diffusion-based methods [41], [42] primarily focus
on natural scene understanding, often requiring multiple
anchor points or pre-trained diffusion models to locate single
or multiple simple objects. When applying them to RS images,

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

numerous challenges arise due to the complex object relationships and size variations of specific targets. For example,
objects in RS images often lack clear boundaries and exhibit
intricate spatial relationships. Also, these targets are diverse in
scale, ranging from small isolated objects (e.g., “tiny vehicle”)
to large complex areas (e.g., “expressway service area”). Our
LPQR-DVG is developed to overcome these challenges. In
detail, we introduce a progressive diffusion-denoising process
within the IQLM, where noisy queries interact iteratively with
both visual and textual information. This enables the queries to
capture complex object characteristics and spatial contextual
relationships gradually. Moreover, unlike methods that rely
on multiple candidate proposals, we formulate the diffusion
process with a single target query. This design allows LPQRDVG to focus on precisely localizing referred objects, thereby
reducing the recognition complexity associated with extreme
variation in object scales.
In addition, the adoption of diffusion modeling stems from
its distinct advantages over alternative paradigms for bounding
box generation. Unlike nongenerative detectors that produce
deterministic coordinates through regression [1], [3], [25],
diffusion models probabilistically refine predictions through
iterative denoising. Through iterative denoising steps, the
random coordinates can gradually transfer to semantically
relevant regions, ultimately generating precise target coordinates as the final prediction. Meanwhile, compared to other
generative frameworks, diffusion models avoid the instability of GANs’ [43] adversarial training and the tendency of
VAEs’ [44] to produce blurry outputs. Critically, the reverse
diffusion process inherently emulates spatial cognition by
progressively refining positional certainty through iterative
denoising. This architecture proves particularly advantageous
for language-guided localization where targets exhibit substantial inter-instance appearance variance.

Fig. 1. Pipeline of LPQR-DVG. It consists of an MTFLM and an IQLM.
MTFLM aims to extract and integrate visual and text features effectively.
IQLM pays attention to deeply interacting with two types of features and
locating the targets precisely. In addition, a progressive diffusion learning
strategy is introduced to train LPQR-DVG for accurate visual grounding.

Fig. 2. Illustration of MTFLM. It consists of a text-guided visual feature
extractor and a textual feature extractor. The textual feature extractor is
responsible for extracting text features and projecting them to multiple
scales to match the multiscale visual features produced by the text-guided
visual feature extractor, as well as the final visual output. The text-guided
visual feature extractor leverages textual guidance to extract text-aware visual
features and employs a transformer encoder to capture global contextual
information.

III. M ETHODS
A. Overview
The overall framework of LPQR-DVG is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Given an RS image I ∈ RC×H×W and its corresponding
textual description T with arbitrary length, LPQR-DVG first
uses MTFLM to extract text-aware visual features xenc
and
v
textual features xenc
.
Then,
an
IQLM
is
introduced
to
enhance
l
and xenc
the interaction between xenc
v
l , while achieving precise target localization. Finally, we introduce a progressive
diffusion learning strategy to fully train LPQR-DVG with the
consideration of the visual–text feature alignment and accuracy
of bounding boxes. Now, we will explain MTFLM, IQLM, and
the progressive diffusion learning strategy in detail. Here, C,
H, and W denote the channels, height, and width of the RS
image, respectively.
B. Multiscale Text-Guided Feature Learning Module
As shown in Fig. 2, MTFLM encloses a text-guided visual
feature extractor and a textual feature extractor. The textural
feature extractor comprises a BERT [45] model, multiscale
projection layers, and a text embedding layer. BERT is used
to extract semantic embeddings xl ∈ R s×dl from the input texts,

where s, dl represents total sequence length and dimensions.
Multiscale projection layers are dedicated to mapping xl
into the immediate textual features with different dimensions.
These immediate features are responsible for transmitting
semantic knowledge
to the visual features. For clarity, we
˚
record them as xkl , k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 , where k represents the kth
stage of the visual encoder. The text embedding layer aims to
∈ R s×d , where d
map xl into the encoded text features xenc
l
donates the dimensions the encoded text features. Here, the
multiscale projection layers and the text embedding layer are
composed of fully connected layers.
The backbone of the text-guided visual feature extractor
is ResNet [46]. For the specific RSVG tasks, the expected
visual features should contain multiscale clues hidden in the
RS image I and be aware of the semantics of the input texts. To
this end, we embed the immediate textual features xkl achieved
by the textual feature extractor into different stages of ResNet
by using a simple multihead cross-attention mechanism [47]
and the residual connection. This step corresponds to the kth
stage of modified ResNet and it can be formulated as


x̂kv = xkv + Reshape Attn Reshape xkv , xkl , xkl
(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: LANGUAGE-GUIDED PROGRESSIVE QUERY REFINEMENT WITH DIFFUSION MODEL

5647614

where xkv ∈ Rck ×hk ×wk and x̂kv ∈ Rck ×hk ×wk denote the outputs of
the kth stage of ResNet and modified ResNet, Attn (·) indicates
the function of the multihead cross-attention mechanism, and
Reshape (·) means the conversion function between 2-D and
1-D data. Here, the channels, heights, and widths of xkv and x̂kv
are ck , hk , and wk . As a result, the text-aware visual features
xv ∈ Rc×h×w , i.e., the final outputs of the modified ResNet,
can be produced, which contain local visual clues and textual
intelligence. Global context relations should also be explored
to further understand the complex contents of RS images.
Therefore, the transformer encoder [38] is embedded at the top
of the modified ResNet. After passing xv through this encoder,
sv ×d
we can get the encoded text-aware visual features xenc
,
v ∈R
enc
where sv = h × w is the sequence length of xv , and d means
the dimension of xenc
v . In this article, we set sv = 625 and
d = 256.
C. Iterative Query Localization Module
To jointly perform feature decoding and coordinate localization, we propose IQLM based on the reversed U-Net [48],
[49], [50]. IQLM takes random coordinates b ∈ R1×2×2
as inputs, aiming to predict the bounding box coordinates
bpredict ∈ R1×2×2 in the RS image corresponding to the
text description. Following [40], a scaling function and a
1 × 1 convolutional layer are used to normalize b to query
q ∈ Rc×2×2 at the beginning of IQLM.
The standard reversed U-Net consists of four encoding
blocks, one middle block, and four decoding blocks. The
encoding blocks aim to extract multiscale features from the
input query and capture detailed information essential for target localization. The middle block processes high-dimensional
feature representations and refines them into more precise
feature maps. The decoding blocks are used to generate
localization outputs based on these refined features. In addition, the up- and down-sampling operations are embedded in
the encoding and decoding blocks to control the data sizes. The
encoding, middle, and decoding blocks are all composed of the
residual unit, whose structure is the same as the U-Net residual
part in Fig. 3. It primarily consists of two convolutional
layers, two group normalization layers, and a normalization
and projection layer, with all components connected in a
residual manner. Suppose the input feature of the ith residual
unit is qi , the output qemb
can be obtained by
i
qemb
= qi + Conv (GN (Conv (GN (qi ))))
i

(2)

where Conv (·) and GN (·) denote the functions of the convolutional and group normalization layers. In the standard reversed
U-Net, each encoding block contains two residual units, the
middle block incorporates one residual unit, and each decoding
block encompasses three residual units.
Although the standard reversed U-Net is able to map the
random query q into the bounding box coordinates bpredict , it
does not take the visual and textual features (xenc
and xenc
v
l )
predict
learned by MTFLM into account. This makes b
less
related to visual and textual information, so it cannot meet the
requirement for RSVG. To address this issue, it is essential
to incorporate both visual and textual information during the
coordinate learning process, as well as to facilitate a thorough

Fig. 3. Structure of each PQR unit in RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net. It
consists of a U-Net residual part and a query refinement part. The U-Net
residual part is designed to capture hierarchical feature representations from
the input query, while the query refinement part facilitates visual–text feature
alignment and enables interactions between the query and both visual and text
features.

interaction between visual and textual features. Therefore, we
construct an RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net, in which a PQR
unit is developed to replace the residual unit in the standard
reversed U-Net. Let us take the ith PQR unit as an example
to explain its structure and function in detail. As shown in
Fig. 3, the PQR unit consists of a U-Net residual part and a
query refinement part. The U-Net residual part aims to capture
hierarchical feature representations from the input data, and the
query refinement part focuses on refining them by employing
the interactions between visual and textural features, ultimately
achieving accurate target localization. For clarity, the input and
output of the ith PQR unit are recorded as qi and qrefine
. When
i
qi is input, the PQR unit first maps it into qemb
using
the
i
U-Net residual part according to (2). Then, the query refinement part is adopted to enable qemb
to interact with xenc
v
i
enc
and xl , thereby acquiring the target referred by textual
information. Meanwhile, xenc
and xenc
can be progressively
v
l
aligned by the multihead attention mechanism [47], which
enables xenc
to highlight messages related to targets referred
v
by xenc
,
thereby
enhancing its discriminative ability.
l
As presented in Fig. 3, the query refinement part first
enc
adds learnable position embeddings to xenc
v and xl , allowing
the attention mechanism to incorporate spatial and semantic
position information. After that, a 1 × 1 convolution layer
and reshape operation are used to project qemb
into 2-D data,
i
enc
ensuring its dimensions align with xenc
and
x
v
l .
Next, we introduce a multihead self-attention layer and three
multihead cross-attention layers to improve query and various
features by interacting with their latent information. Finally,
we obtain the final output qrefine
of the ith PQR unit with a
i
reshape operation and a 1 × 1 convolution layer. The whole
process of the query refinement part can be expressed as

enc enc
xrefine
= CAttn xenc
v
v , xl , xl

enc enc
xrefine
= SAttn xenc
l
l , xl , xl

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

, xrefine
qli = CAttn Reshape (Conv (qi )) , xrefine
l
l




l
refine refine
qvl
, xv
, xrefine
, xrefine
i = CAttn qi , xl
v
l

qrefine
= Conv Reshape qvl
i
i



(3)

where Conv(·) represents convolutional layers, SAttn(·) and
CAttn(·) mean the multihead self- and cross-attention layers,
Reshape(·) indicates the conversion function between 3-D and
2-D data, and [·] denotes feature concatenation along the
sequence dimension. There is another point we want to touch
on, that is, qi is varied according to its position in the RSVGoriented reversed U-Net. In the first encoding block, qi is
equal to the initial query q. In the following encoding and
mid blocks, qi is the output of the (i − 1)th PQR unit qrefine
i−1 . In
decoding blocks, qi can be obtained from the concatenation
of qrefine
and the output of corresponding jth PQR encoding
i−1
unit qrefine
.
j
Based on the PQR unit, our RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net
is constructed. It consists of four encoding blocks, one middle
block, and four decoding blocks. Each encoding block contains
two PQR units, the middle block contains one PQR unit, and
each decoding block contains three PQR units. The RSVGoriented reversed U-Net can not only improve the query with
the assistance of visual and text features but also thoroughly
align different features. Hence, the localization performance
can be ensured. Note that the refined query qrefine
from the
i
last PQR unit would be projected by a convolutional layer
and then passed through a re-signal function to achieve the
predicted bounding box bpredict .
D. Diffusion Process and Training Loss
This article introduces a diffusion paradigm to train the
proposed LPQR-DVG. It progressively removes noises added
to the query q under the guidance of xenc
and xenc
to push
v
l
the model achieves better visual–text alignment and improved
referred target localization. To complete the diffusion process,
the sinusoidal positional embedding and MLP layers are used
i
to generate time steps temb
∈ Rci , and these time steps would
be added to the input query after the first convolutional layer
of the U-Net residual part in each PQR unit. Here, ci represents
the channels in the ith PQR unit.
The schematic of the diffusion procedure is displayed in
Fig. 4. In the training stage, the ground truth bounding
box (x, y, w, h) is first used as the initial coordinate input
b0 ∈ R1×2×2 , where (x, y) denotes the center coordinates of
the bounding box, and (w, h) represents its width and height,
respectively. Consistent with IQLM, a signal function is used
to scale the input bounding box, resulting in the signal box
signal
b0 . Then, following the diffusion paradigm in DDPM [51],
a Markovian chain of diffusion forward process is defined by
gradually adding noise to the initialized coordinates, which
can be defined as:
ᾱt =

t
Y

αs =

s=0

b



ˇ

signal ˇ signal
bt
ˇ b0



=N



t
Y

βs

s=0

signal
signal ˇ √
bt
ˇ ᾱt b0 , (1 − ᾱt )I

ˇ



(4)

where β s represents the noise variance schedule at step s, ᾱt
denotes the cumulative product of noise schedule coefficients

Fig. 4. Schematic of the diffusion procedure for producing the location
bounding box. Specifically, the signal and re-signal functions are employed to
scale the bounding box to an appropriate range. By adding noise to the signal
box and enabling continuous interactions with visual and textual features
within IQLM, a denoised bounding box can be obtained. Finally, the predicted
bounding box is produced as the final output.

signal

signal

at step t, b0
implies the initial signal box, and bt
illustrates the latent noisy box at diffusion step t, which can be
obtained via sampling from the conditional normal distribution
defined above. This forward process transforms the signal box
signal
signal
b0
to a latent noisy box bt
by adding noise at a time t to
signal
b0 , where t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T }. In this article, we set T = 1000.
signal
Next, bt
is passed through a convolutional projection layer
and fed into the IQLM. As mentioned in Section III-C, after
we obtain the PQR last unit’s output qrefine
from IQLM, a
i
convolutional projection layer transforms qrefine
into the refined
i
refine
and denoised bounding box brefine
.
Finally,
b
is passed
0
0
through a re-signal function to obtain the predicted target
predict
bounding box b0
. In the inference stage, following the
diffusion paradigm, we first randomly initialize a noisy box
signal
b0 ∈ R1×2×2 ∼ N (0, 1), and then normalize it to b0 . Then,
signal
the signal box b0
is input into the RSVG-oriented reversed
U-Net. By progressively refining the denoised query, the final
predict
output b0
can be obtained.
The loss function Ltrain in this article consists of two
parts, i.e., the box localization loss Lbox
train and auxiliary box
box
refinement loss Laux
.
L
is
designed
to jointly optimize
train
train
precise coordinate regression and geometric consistency in the
diffusion process, which can be defined as




predict
predict
+ λ2 LGIOU b0 , b0
(5)
Lbox
train = λ1 Lsmooth-L1 b0 , b0
where Lsmooth-L1 (·) and LGIOU (·) denote the smooth-L1 loss
and generalized intersection over union (GIoU) loss [52], b0
predict
and b0
indicate the ground truth coordinate and output
denoised predict bounding box, and λ1 and λ2 mean the
balance coefficient. Laux
train is developed to enhance feature
learning through deep supervision, whose definition is


aux
Laux
+ λ2 LGIOU b0 , baux
0
train = λ1 Lsmooth−L1 b0 , b0

refine
baux
(6)
0 = MLP avgpool qi
where baux
0 is the auxiliary predict bounding box of each PQR
unit, avgpool (·) and MLP (·) illustrate the function of average
pooling and multilayer perceptron, and λ1 and λ2 also mean
the balance coefficient. In this article, we fix λ1 = 5 and
λ2 = 2 according to [3]. More details related to Laux
train can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: LANGUAGE-GUIDED PROGRESSIVE QUERY REFINEMENT WITH DIFFUSION MODEL

5647614

Fig. 6. Visual examples and their textual descriptions. Six RS scenes are
randomly selected from OPT-RSVG, and they are located at the top of each
cube. Their corresponding textual descriptions are exhibited at the bottom of
each block. The green boxes in these RS scenes are the ground truths.
Fig. 5. Visual examples and their textual descriptions. Six RS scenes are
randomly selected from DIOR-RSVG, and they are located at the top of each
cube. Their corresponding textual descriptions are exhibited at the bottom of
each block. The green boxes in these RS scenes are the ground truths.

found in DETR [38]. Finally, the loss function for our model
is formulated as
aux
Ltrain = Lbox
train + αLtrain

(7)

where α is a hyperparameter that balances the contributions
of the two terms. In this article, we set α = 1 empirically.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets Description
To testify to the effectiveness and robustness of our method,
we select two popular datasets, including DIOR-RSVG [2] and
OPT-RSVG [1]. The DIOR-RSVG dataset was constructed
by researchers from Northwestern Polytechnical University
in 2023. It is an extension of the DIOR dataset [53].
DIOR-RSVG contains 17 402 high-resolution RS scenes. Their
spatial sizes are 800 × 800, and their spatial resolutions range
from 0.5 to 30 m. There are 38 320 textual descriptions
in DIOR-RSVG corresponding to referred objects across 20
classes, such as airplane and basketball court. The average
length of these descriptions is 7.47 words. Some visual
examples and their textual descriptions are shown in Fig. 5.
Following [2], we fix the ratio of training, validating, and
testing sets as 7:1:2. In other words, 26 991 (70%), 3829
(10%), and 7500 (20%) image-language pairs are randomly
selected to construct the training, validation, and testing sets.
The OPT-RSVG dataset was constructed by researchers
from Xidian University in 2024. It contains 25 452 RS scenes,
and their spatial sizes vary from 152 × 162 to 8935 ×
10 569. There are 48 952 text descriptions across 14 object
categories, including crossroads, bridges, and others. The
average length of these text descriptions is 10.10 words.
Some visual examples and their textual descriptions are shown
in Fig. 6. Following [1], 19 580 (40%), 4895 (10%), and
24 477 (50%) image-language pairs are randomly selected to
construct the training, validation, and testing sets. Compared to
DIOR-RSVG, OPT-RSVG presents greater challenges due
to its extreme variations in target scales, increased similar
objects, diverse viewing angles, and complex background
noise.

B. Experimental Settings
All experiments are conducted on a workstation equipped
with a GeForce RTX 3090 with 24 GB of memory. The
parameters of the ResNet backbone, transformer encoder, and
textual backbone in MTFLM are initialized using the pretrained weights in DETR [38] and BERT [45]. Other parts
of our LPQR-DVG are initialized randomly. The channel
multipliers in the RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net are used
to scale the number of channels at each layer. Specifically,
we initialize the model with 32 base channels and employ
multipliers [1, 2, 2, 2] to determine how the channel count
evolves through each block of the RSVG-oriented reversed
U-Net. The AdamW optimizer [54] is employed to update
the LPQR-DVG’s parameters. Its initial learning rates are
set as 1 × 10−5 and 1 × 10−4 for MTFLM and IQLM. The
learning rate is reduced by a factor of 0.1 at the 60th epoch.
The total number of training epochs is 100 (equivalent to
300 000 diffusion steps), and the batch size is fixed at 9. The
inference query sampling steps in DDPM [51] are set to ten by
default.
Three assessment criteria are adopted to evaluate LPQRDVG’s performance [1], [2], [3], including Precision@X
(Pr @X), mean intersection over union (mIoU), and cumulative
intersection over union (cIoU). Before defining them, we
first introduce intersection over union (IoU). It calculates the
overlaps between the predicted boxes and the ground truth
boxes, which can be formulated as IoUi = Ii /Ui , where
IoUi represents the IoU of ith sample, Ii is the area of
overlap between the predicted bounding box and the ground
truth bounding box, Ui is the total area covered by both
the predicted and ground truth bounding boxes. Based on
IoU, Pr @X can be defined as the percentage of IoU overlap
exceeding a threshold X, mIoU can be interpreted as the
average IoU values across all testing samples, and cIoU can
be described as the cumulative IoU values over all predictions.
Note that the threshold X ranges from 0.5 to 0.9 in the
following experiments. Among them, the definitions of mIoU
and cIoU are
N

1 X
Ii /Ui ,
mIoU =
N
i=1

cIoU =

N
X
i=1

Ii /

N
X

Ui

i=1

where N represents the total number of input samples.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(8)

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON DIOR-RSVG

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON OPT-RSVG

C. Comparison With Existing Methods
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we
compare it against seven existing methods, including FAOA
[28], ReSC [30], LBYL-Net [29], TransVG [33], VLTVG
[35], MGVLF [2], and LPVA [1]. The first three methods are
developed based on CNN, and the last four are transformerbased approaches. Their details, such as visual and textual
backbones, can be found in Tables I and II. Here, FAOA
and LBYL-Net have two versions due to the different textual
encoders. The results of them and our LPQR-DVG counted
on DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG are shown in Tables I
and II, respectively.
1) Analysis of Results on DIOR-RSVG: From the observation of the results in Table I, it is evident that the performance
of all methods is acceptable. The CNN-based approaches
estimate the positions of referred objects based on crossmodal representations, and they eliminate candidate proposals
typically used in object detection to enhance the efficiency
of predicting accurate target regions through an end-to-end
paradigm. Among them, the weakest is FAOA. When its
language encoder is BERT, its Pr @0.5, Pr @0.9, mIoU, and
cIoU values are only 60.69%, 4.32%, 0.4925, and 0.5768,
respectively. This is because FAOA’s spatial feature encoding
cannot establish the complex correspondence between vision
and language. To mitigate this issue, ReSC employs a recursive

subquery to refine visual features. As a result, its various
metrics are significantly higher than those of FAOA. Compared to FAOA and ResC, the behavior of LBYL-NET is
more attractive since it employs a landmark-aware feature
convolution mechanism, which is beneficial for the model to
understand spatial-semantic relationships. However, the mIoU
of LBYL-NET is somewhat disappointing. The problem lies in
the landmark-aware convolution mechanism. Although it can
establish relationships between images and text, this regionbased convolution struggles when interpreting RS images with
varying scales and complex content.
CNN-based methods often rely on manually designed
visual–textual relation modeling, which limits their generalization and stability. Transformer-based methods can effectively
solve this problem, as the attention mechanism in transformers
is well-suited for interacting with and fusing image and
text features, ultimately leading to accurate target localization. As illustrated in Table I, TransVG, VLTVG, MGVLF,
and LPVA consistently outperform CNN-based approaches
in most cases. Especially under the higher precision thresholds (e.g., Pr @0.9), the performance enhancements achieved
by the transformer-based models are distinct. For example,
compared with LBYL-Net-LSTM (i.e., the best CNN-based
approach in Pr @0.9), the improvements of TransVG, VLTVG,
MGVLF, and LPVA are 6.11%, 16.52%, 13.08%, and 13.56%,
respectively. For mIoU, the advantages of transformer-based

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: LANGUAGE-GUIDED PROGRESSIVE QUERY REFINEMENT WITH DIFFUSION MODEL

methods are also quite noticeable. For instance, TransVG,
VLTVG, MGVLF, and LPVA are 0.0283, 0.0639, 0.0487,
and 0.067 higher than ReSC, which is the best CNN-based
approach in mIoU. The above positive results achieved by
TransVG, VLTVG, MGVLF, and LPVA can be attributed to
the transformers’ superior capacity for modeling fine-grained
cross-modal interactions through attention mechanisms.
Although the compared models produce good results, the
proposed LPQR-DVG still outperforms them in all cases. Taking Pr @0.5 as an example, our LPQR-DVG achieves 78.69%,
outperforming LPVA (the second-best model) by 3.48%. Taking mIoU as another example, LPQR-DVG achieves 0.6844,
marking an improvement of 0.034 over LPVA. The superior
performance of our LPQR-DVG model can be attributed to
two points. First, the integration of text guidance throughout
the visual feature extraction process significantly enhances
visual–textual understanding by continuously aligning visual
features with linguistic context. Second, the novel RSVGoriented reversed U-Net architecture enables hierarchical,
multistage cross-modal interaction through its progressive upsampling and down-sampling pathways, which systematically
refine visual-linguistic alignment at different spatial scales. An
encouraging point is that there are significant performance
gaps between LPQR-DVG and other methods. This is due to
the incorporation of a diffusion paradigm with our RSVGoriented reversed U-Net, which revolutionizes the localization
process by formulating it as an iterative denoising procedure.
This approach enables the progressive refinement of noisy
queries, leading to more accurate and robust identification of
semantically relevant regions.
2) Analysis of Results on OPT-RSVG: As detailed in
Table II, similar to the results on DIOR-RSVG, the performance of different methods based on OPT-RSVG is
appropriate. For the CNN-based methods, LBYL-Net-LSTM
and ReSC outperform others. Their Pr @0.5 values are as
high as 72.82% and 73.24%. However, it is worth noting
that LBYL-NET-BERT struggles to produce stable results on
OPT-RSVG. These observations suggest that CNN-based
methods, which often rely on manually designed visual–textual
relation modeling, exhibit limitations in both stability and
accuracy due to their information mining manner.
Transformer-based methods leverage attention mechanisms
to effectively model interactions between image and text
features, ultimately leading to more accurate target localization. Consequently, on the OPT-RSVG dataset, these
methods consistently outperform CNN-based approaches in
most cases, especially under stricter localization thresholds
such as Pr @0.9. For example, compared to ReSC (i.e., the best
CNN-based method in Pr @0.9), TransVG, VLTVG, MGVLF,
and LPVA achieve improvements of 4.73%, 9.95%, 8.3%, and
6.04%, respectively. A similar advantage is observed in mIoU.
For example, TransVG, VLTVG, MGVLF, and LPVA exceed
ReSC (i.e., the best CNN-based model in mIoU) by 0.0211,
0.0364, 0.0311, and 0.0444, respectively.
Aligning with the observations on DIOR-RSVG, the proposed LPQR-DVG consistently outperforms all compared
methods across all evaluation metrics. Taking Pr @0.5 as an
example, our LPQR-DVG achieves 78.26%, outperforming
LPVA (the second-best model) by 1.83%. Taking mIoU as

5647614

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY OF M AIN PARTS OF LPQR-DVG

another example, LPQR-DVG achieves 0.6693, marking an
improvement of 0.0237 over LPVA. Collectively, the sustained
high performance across both DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG
datasets underscores not only the robustness of our method but
also its superior generalization capabilities to novel contexts.
Besides the numerical results, visual location maps achieved
by different models are also provided and discussed. Due to
space limitations, the detailed visual results and corresponding
discussion can be found in the supplementary material.
D. Ablation Studies
As introduced in Section III, the main parts of our
LPQR-DVG are MTFLM, IQLM, and the diffusion training
algorithm. Meanwhile, the key components in MTFLM and
IQLM are the multiscale text guidance and the PQR unit.
To investigate their contributions to LPQR-DVG, this section
outlines the design of the ablation experiments.
First, we fix the diffusion training algorithm and examine
the importance of multiscale text guidance and the PQR unit.
To this end, the multiscale text guidance would be removed
from LPQR-DVG, and the PQR unit would also be replaced
with a standard cross-attention transformer unit. Note that
only one of the two steps above is executed at a time. The
results of different LPQR-DVGs counted on the two datasets
are summarized in Table III. For clarity, we report their
Pr @0.5 and mIoU values exclusively. When the multiscale
text guidance and PQR unit are ablated (see the first row),
LPQR-DVG’s performance drops significantly, achieving only
68.59% Pr @0.5 and 0.5975 mIoU on DIOR-RSVG, and
69.11% Pr @0.5 and 0.5955 mIoU on OPT-RSVG. Once the
multiscale text guidance is added (see the second row), the
model’s Pr @0.5 and mIoU values are enhanced by 9.36%
and 0.0799 on DIOR-RSVG, and 7.96% and 0.0641 on OPTRSVG. This means that incorporating multiscale text guidance
enables early visual–text interaction during feature extraction,
which reduces the complexity of later-stage vision-text alignment and enhances localization accuracy. Alternatively, when
only the PQR unit is added (see the third row), LPQR-DVG
achieves 72.89% and 0.6369 for Pr @0.5 and mIoU on DIORRSVG, and 73.83% and 0.6356 on OPT-RSVG. This indicates
that the PQR unit in IQLM effectively aligns visual and textual
features, enabling efficient interaction between queries, visual
elements, and textual features, ultimately enhancing localization accuracy. Finally, when the multiscale text guidance
and PQR unit are both incorporated (see the fourth row),
the complete LPQR-DVG’s behavior becomes the strongest.
This implies that the combination of multiscale text guidance

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE IV

TABLE V

A BLATION S TUDY OF I NTERACTION S TAGES IN MTFLM

A NALYSIS OF THE I NFLUENCE OF L ANGUAGE M ODELS ON LPQR-DVG

and the PQR unit enables comprehensive vision-language
alignment, facilitating effective cross-modal feature interaction
and query-based feature learning, which leads to precise target
localization.
Second, the diffusion training algorithm is changed to
the standard training algorithm to determine if the diffusion
paradigm is necessary or not. The results are also exhibited in
Table III. By analyzing the scores in the fourth and fifth rows,
we can easily see that LPQR-DVG with diffusion outperforms
LPQR-DVG with the standard training strategy. Specifically,
removing the diffusion algorithm results in declines of 2.23%
and 0.0207 in Pr @0.5 and mIoU on DIOR-RSVG, and 2%
and 0.0292 in Pr @0.5 and mIoU on OPT-RSVG. This denotes
that the diffusion learning paradigm can progressively align
visual–text features through its iterative refinement process,
enabling gradual convergence to accurate target locations.

correspondences from low-level textures to high-level semantics. Therefore, our LPQR-DVG model adopts guidance from
all five stages as the default setting. In addition to the numerical results, we still investigate the attention maps of each stage
to analyze their distinct contributions to textual information
processing. The details can be found in the supplementary
material.
2) Different Text Encoders in MTFLM: As detailed in
Section III-B, MTFLM adopts BERT [45] as the text backbone
of its textual feature extractor. To investigate whether this
choice is suitable, we replace BERT with several other popular
language models, including ALBERT [55], RoBERTa [56],
CLIP [57], and RemoteCLIP [58]. ALBERT and RoBERTa
focus on general language understanding, while CLIP and
RemoteCLIP are specialized for visual–text alignment tasks.
The Pr 0.5 and mIoU scores of LPQR-DVGs with different
language models counted on DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG
are summarized in Table V.
As detailed in the table, the behavior of LPQR-DVGs with
different textual backbones is acceptable. Among the compared textual backbones, CLIP and RemoteCLIP demonstrate
weaker performance. For DIOR-RSVG, CLIP and RemoteCLIP achieve 70.31% and 69.92% on Pr 0.5, with 0.6094
and 0.6034 on mIoU, respectively. For OPT-RSVG, their
Pr 0.5 scores are 69.42% and 72.24% on Pr 0.5, and their
mIoU values are 0.5963 and 0.6170. This is because CLIP
and RemoteCLIP pay more attention to building the relationships between RS images and scene-level semantics. Their
capacity to interpret complex textual descriptions is relatively
low, which limits their effectiveness in RSVG tasks. The
strongest one is RoBERTa, with Pr 0.5 and mIoU scores of
77.71% and 0.6762, and 78.25% and 0.6687 on DIOR-RSVG
and OPT-RSVG, respectively. Compared to them, LPQRDVG with BERT achieves the best performance. For Pr 0.5,
its improvements are 6.85% and 5.97% (over ALBERT),
0.98% and 0.01% (over RoBERTa), 8.38% and 8.84% (over
CLIP), and 8.77% and 6.02% (over RemoteCLIP) on DIORRSVG and OPT-RSVG. For mIoU, its enhancements are
0.0687 and 0.051 (over ALBERT), 0.0082 and 0.0006 (over
RoBERTa), 0.075 and 0.073 (over CLIP), and 0.081 and
0.0523 (over RemoteCLIP) on the two datasets. These findings
illustrate that choosing BERT as the textual backbone is
suitable for our tasks.

E. Further Analysis of MTFLM
Based on the ablation study results (see Section IV-D),
the usefulness of multiscale text guidance in MTFLM is
confirmed. This section will investigate its significance to our
LPQR-DVG from two perspectives: the role of text guidance
in visual feature extraction, and the impact of different text
encoders on the final results.
1) Text Guidance in Visual Feature Extraction: As discussed in Section III-B, the textual clues are embedded into all
stages of ResNet-50. Here, the multiscale text guidance would
be analyzed by varying the incorporation stages from deep to
shallow. The results of various LPQR-DVGs are exhibited in
Table IV. For clarity, we only select Pr @0.5 and mIoU as the
assessment criteria. Meanwhile, the LPQR-DVGs’ parameter
volume (#Params.) is also chosen for the evaluation. By
observing the table, we can see that as the number of incorporating stages increases, LPQR-DVGs’ performance improves
with an acceptable parameter volume growth. Taking results
on DIOR-RSVG as an example, when implementing text
guidance at stage 4, LPQR-DVG achieves 77.56% on Pr @0.5
and 0.6734 on mIoU, and its parameter volume is equal to
197.65 M. When implementing text guidance at all stages, the
model achieves 1.13% and 0.011 improvements in Pr @0.5
and mIoU, respectively, and its parameter volume increases
by only 6.57 M. Similarly, on OPT-RSVG, implementing
text guidance at all stages can also yield improvements of
0.83% in Pr @0.5 and 0.0061 in mIoU compared to implementing text guidance only at Stage 4. This indicates that
implementing text guidance across all network stages enables
comprehensive visual–text interaction, achieving cross-modal

F. Further Analysis of IQLM
The usefulness of the PQR unit in IQLM has been
confirmed in Section IV-D. This section will further

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: LANGUAGE-GUIDED PROGRESSIVE QUERY REFINEMENT WITH DIFFUSION MODEL

5647614

TABLE VI
A NALYSIS OF U-N ET R ESIDUAL PART IN IQLM

TABLE VII
A NALYSIS OF RSVG-O RIENTED R EVERSED U-N ET C HANNEL S ETTINGS

Fig. 7. Analysis of diffusion inference sampling steps. As the number of
inference steps increases, the performance becomes stable.

investigate its significance to our LPQR-DVG. As explained in
Section III-C, the PQR unit consists of a U-Net residual
part and a query refinement part. The U-Net residual part
aims to capture hierarchical feature representations from the
input data, while the query refinement part focuses on refining these representations by leveraging interactions between
visual and textual features, ultimately achieving accurate target
localization. The two parts of the PQR unit perform distinct roles, providing complementary information to support
the final location. To further study their contributions to
LPQR-DVG, we conduct the following ablation experiments.
First, the U-Net residual part is removed from the PQR unit. In
other words, the query refinement part works alone. Second,
we call back the U-Net residual part to construct a complete
PQR unit.
The Pr @0.5 and mIoU scores of LPQR-DVGs with only the
query refinement part and the complete PQR unit are exhibited
in Table VI. It is obvious that the complete PQR unit improves
the overall performance of LPQR-DVG. Taking results on
DIOR-RSVG as an example, when the U-Net residual part is
removed (see the first row), LPQR-DVG’s Pr @0.5 and mIoU
values are as low as 77.61% and 0.6734. Once the U-Net
residual part is added to the PQR unit (see the second row), the
model’s Pr @0.5 and mIoU values are enhanced by 1.08% and
0.011. Similar results can be observed on OPT-RSVG, where
incorporating the U-Net residual component into the PQR unit
enhances the model’s Pr @0.5 and mIoU by 0.8% and 0.0081,
respectively. These findings suggest that the inclusion of the UNet residual part enhances feature representation optimization,
thereby improving localization accuracy. In addition, although
the behavior of LPQR-DVG with only the query refinement
part is weaker, its scores are still fair. This implies that the
query refinement part’s potential for independent work.
G. Free Settings Analysis
1) Channel Settings for RSVG-Oriented Reversed U-Net:
In LPQR-DVG, the RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net plays the
crucial role in obtaining predicted coordinates. To explore the

impact of different channel settings on the RSVG-oriented
reversed U-Net’s performance, we change the channel numbers from 8 to 256. In these cases, LPQR-DVGs’ Pr @0.5
and mIoU counted on the two datasets are summarized in
Table VII. We can observe that as the channel number
increases, the behavior of LPQR-DVG first strengthens and
then weakens, and the peak values of Pr @0.5 and mIoU
appear when the channel number equals 32. In addition, the
model sizes grow with the number of channels. These examinations suggest that when the initial channel number is too
small, the model suffers from inadequate feature representation
capacity, resulting in compromised semantic understanding.
Meanwhile, the large channel numbers would introduce unnecessary complexity, leading to overfitting and a degradation in
localization accuracy. In summary, the number of channels
should be carefully selected within an appropriate range. As a
result, in this article, we set the initial channel number to 32.
2) Inference Sampling Steps: In the inference phase, the
DDPM [51] strategy is employed for the final prediction. Thus,
different sampling steps may lead to varying results during
inference. To ensure a suitable number of sampling steps for
our LPQR-DVG, we vary it from 1 to 10 and count the mIoU
values of LPQR-DVGs counted on the two datasets for clarity.
The curves are drawn in Fig. 7. When the sampling steps
are limited (e.g., the number of steps is fewer than 6), the
model’s performance fluctuates distinctly. For example, with
only one step, LPQR-DVG achieves merely 0.6814 mIoU on
DIOR-RSVG, as insufficient steps prevent the full utilization
of the diffusion paradigm’s iterative refinement capability.
When increasing to two and four steps, the model achieves
improvements of 0.0024 and 0.0027 on mIoU, demonstrating
a gradual enhancement through multistage denoising. The performance eventually stabilizes when exceeding six sampling
steps, reaching a plateau of 0.6844 mIoU with ten sampling steps, indicating convergence of the diffusion process’s
error correction capacity. Similar results can be observed on
OPT-RSVG. LPQR-DVG achieves 0.6677 mIoU on the
OPT-RSVG dataset with only one sampling step. When the
number of sampling steps is increased to 10, the model
achieves a stable mIoU of 0.6693. As a result, in this article,
the inference step is set to ten as the default. Following this, to
further investigate the distinct roles of each sampling step, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE VIII
PARAMETER VOLUME AND I NFERENCE S PEED OF LPQR-DVG

Fig. 8. Influence of α on LPQR-DVG. The mIoU curves are counted on
DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG.

conduct visualizations of the target localization results at each
sampling step for the ten inference steps setting. Due to space
limitations, the visual results and corresponding discussion can
be found in the supplementary material.
3) Loss Weight Parameters of LPQR-DVG: Our loss function Ltrain [see (7)] consists of two parts, i.e., the box
localization loss Lbox
train and auxiliary box refinement loss
box
Laux
.
L
is
designed
to jointly optimize precise coordinate
train
train
regression and geometric consistency in the diffusion process.
Laux
train is developed to enhance feature learning through deep
supervision. To deeply investigate their functions, we tune the
values of the hyperparameter α in a range of {0.1, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2}.
The mIoU scores of LPQR-DVGs with different loss functions
counted on the two datasets are displayed in Fig. 8. By
observing the curves, we can find the following points. Taking
the DIOR-RSVG dataset as an example, when α is set to
1, LPQR-DVG achieves the optimal mIoU of 0.6844. As α
continues to increase, the mIoU exhibits a monotonic decrease,
eventually reaching 0.6824 at α = 2, which corresponds to a
reduction of 0.0020 compared to the performance at α = 1.
Moreover, when smaller values of α are used (e.g., α = 0.5),
mIoU declines by 0.0008, and the training process exhibits
noticeably reduced stability under these conditions. Similar
results can be observed on the OPT-RSVG dataset. When
α = 1, LPQR-DVG’s mIoU reaches its maximum value of
0.6693. When α = 0.5, 0.1 and α = 1.5, 2, the mIoU decreases
by 0.0016, 0.0068, 0.009, and 0.0024, respectively. This trend
confirms that both large and small values of α adversely affect
localization performance. Based on the above discussion, we
suggest that the optimal values of α for different tasks can be
fixed around 1.

compared methods utilize a smaller input size of 640 × 640.
Consequently, LPQR-DVG exhibits a slight increase in model
parameters, with 75.82 M over LPVA and 59.19 M over
VLTVG. However, this parameter overhead is acceptable given
the significant improvement in the model’s overall performance across the DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG datasets. For
the inference speed, LPQR-DVG spends more time compared
to other methods, as it is significantly affected by the diffusion
process. As shown in Table VIII, the inference time increases
with additional inference steps. Fortunately, all of them remain
within the millisecond range. Considering that the diffusion
process can enhance both the precision and prediction stability
of LPQR-DVG, the current moderate computational overhead
is worthwhile. Speeding up the inference process is one of our
future works.
V. C ONCLUSION

This article proposes a new model for RSVG tasks named
LPQR-DVG. It primarily consists of an MTFLM module
and an IQLM module. MTFLM is designed to continuously
guide visual features with textual information throughout the
feature extraction process, ensuring more robust and contextually aligned interactions between visual and text features.
IQLM is developed to enable sufficient interaction between
queries, visual, and text features during the training process in the RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net, enhancing the
model’s understanding capabilities of discriminative details
in both text and visual features. To train LPQR-DVG properly, we introduce a progressive diffusion learning strategy.
H. Parameter Volume and Inference Speed of LPQR-DVG
By progressively denoising noisy bounding box coordinates
This section analyzes the parameter volume and inference through iterative interactions with visual and textual featime costs of our LPQR-DVG. The comparisons between tures in the RSVG-oriented reversed U-Net, more accurate
LPQR-DVG and other methods are summarized in Table VIII. localization results can be achieved. Positive experimental
Our model incurs moderately higher parameter sizes and results based on the DIOR-RSVG and OPT-RSVG datasets
computational costs than efficient alternatives, such as LPVA indicate that our model shows promising results for the RSVG
and VLTVG. The reasons behind these findings are twofold. task.
Although our model demonstrates competitive performance,
One is the complexity of the model, and the other is the
there remains room for improvement. First, the visual features
number of diffusion sampling steps.
Regarding model parameters, LPQR-DVG employs an input used in IQLM, while capturing both local and global inforsize of 800×800 and facilitates multistage progressive interac- mation, are limited to a single scale. It would be beneficial to
Authorized
licensed useand
limited
to: XIDIAN
UNIVERSITY.
Downloaded
April 16,2026
05:50:59
UTC from IEEE
Xplore.
Restrictions
apply.
tion through
the MTFLM
IQLM
modules.
In contrast,
the on explore
theatuse
of multiscale
visual
features
from
MTFLM to

TANG et al.: LANGUAGE-GUIDED PROGRESSIVE QUERY REFINEMENT WITH DIFFUSION MODEL

enhance interaction with textual features. Second, compared
with existing methods, LPQR-DVG still shows limitations in
terms of model size and inference speed. Therefore, further
improving the model’s performance while reducing its size
and enhancing inference speed will be the focus of our future
research.
R EFERENCES
[1]

K. Li, D. Wang, H. Xu, H. Zhong, and C. Wang, “Language-guided
progressive attention for visual grounding in remote sensing images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5631413.
[2] Y. Zhan, Z. Xiong, and Y. Yuan, “RSVG: Exploring data and models for
visual grounding on remote sensing data,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5604513.
[3] M. Lan, F. Rong, H. Jiao, Z. Gao, and L. Zhang, “Language query-based
transformer with multiscale cross-modal alignment for visual grounding
on remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
2024, Art. no. 5626513.
[4] S. Wang, W. Han, X. Huang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, and J. Li, “Trustworthy
remote sensing interpretation: Concepts, technologies, and applications,”
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 209, pp. 150–172, Mar. 2024.
[5] W. Zhang, M. Cai, T. Zhang, Y. Zhuang, J. Li, and X. Mao,
“EarthMarker: A visual prompting multimodal large language model
for remote sensing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025,
Art. no. 5604219.
[6] D. Zhao et al., “Panoptic perception: A novel task and fine-grained
dataset for universal remote sensing image interpretation,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5620714.
[7] W. Bao, M. Huang, J. Hu, and X. Xiang, “Dual-dynamic cross-modal
interaction network for multimodal remote sensing object detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5401013.
[8] L. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, X. Su, and K. Fu, “Cross-modal contrastive
learning with spatiotemporal context for correlation-aware multiscale
remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5629821.
[9] Z. Yang, Q. Li, Y. Yuan, and Q. Wang, “HCNet: Hierarchical feature
aggregation and cross-modal feature alignment for remote sensing image
captioning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no.
5624711.
[10] C. Liu, J. Ma, X. Tang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Deep hash
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3420–3443, Apr. 2021.
[11] Y. Wang, X. Tang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Cross-modal
remote sensing image-text retrieval via context and uncertainty-aware
prompt,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6,
pp. 11384–11398, Jun. 2024.
[12] X. Tang, D. Huang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Priorexperience-based vision-language model for remote sensing image-text
retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no.
5641913.
[13] X. Tang, Y. Wang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Interactingenhancing feature transformer for cross-modal remote-sensing image
and text retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5611715.
[14] X. Tang, M. Li, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “EMTCAL:
Efficient multiscale transformer and cross-level attention learning for
remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5626915.
[15] X. Tang, Q. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Ma, and L. Jiao, “Attention
consistent network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 2030–2045, 2021.
[16] R. Du, X. Tang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “MLMamba: A
mamba-based efficient network for multi-label remote sensing scene
classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 35, no. 7,
pp. 6245–6258, Jul. 2025.
[17] R. Du, X. Tang, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Semanticassisted feature integration network for multilabel remote sensing scene
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art.
no. 5603015.
[18] Y. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised multiscale dynamic graph convolution
network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 6806–6820, May 2024.

5647614

[19] X. Tang et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on
3-D octave convolution with spatial–spectral attention network,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2430–2447,
Mar. 2021.
[20] J. Wang et al., “EarthVQANet: Multi-task visual question answering for
remote sensing image understanding,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote
Sens., vol. 212, pp. 422–439, Jun. 2024.
[21] Y. Zhan, Z. Xiong, and Y. Yuan, “SkyEyeGPT: Unifying remote sensing vision-language tasks via instruction tuning with large language
model,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 221, pp. 64–77,
Mar. 2025.
[22] G. Wang et al., “Negative deterministic information-based multiple instance learning for weakly supervised object detection and
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 4,
pp. 1–15, Apr. 2025.
[23] S. Lei, X. Xiao, T. Zhang, H.-C. Li, Z. Shi, and Q. Zhu, “Exploring
fine-grained image-text alignment for referring remote sensing image
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art.
no. 5604611.
[24] Y. Sun, S. Feng, X. Li, Y. Ye, J. Kang, and X. Huang, “Visual grounding
in remote sensing images,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
2022, pp. 404–412.
[25] F. Wang, C. Wu, J. Wu, L. Wang, and C. Li, “Multistage synergistic
aggregation network for remote sensing visual grounding,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[26] S. Yang, G. Li, and Y. Yu, “Dynamic graph attention for referring
expression comprehension,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 4644–4653.
[27] R. Korekata et al., “Switching head-tail funnel UNITER for dual
referring expression comprehension with fetch-and-carry tasks,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2023,
pp. 3865–3872.
[28] Z. Yang, B. Gong, L. Wang, W. Huang, D. Yu, and J. Luo, “A fast and
accurate one-stage approach to visual grounding,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Jun. 2019, pp. 4683–4693.
[29] B. Huang, D. Lian, W. Luo, and S. Gao, “Look before you leap:
Learning landmark features for one-stage visual grounding,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 16883–16892.
[30] Z. Yang, T. Chen, L. Wang, and J. Luo, “Improving one-stage visual
grounding by recursive sub-query construction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Glasgow, U.K.: Springer, 2020, pp. 387–404.
[31] L. Jin et al., “RefCLIP: A universal teacher for weakly supervised
referring expression comprehension,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–10.
[32] Y. Du, Z. Fu, Q. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Visual grounding with
transformers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul.
2022, pp. 1–6.
[33] J. Deng, Z. Yang, T. Chen, W. Zhou, and H. Li, “TransVG: End-toend visual grounding with transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 1769–1779.
[34] W. Su, P. Miao, H. Dou, Y. Fu, and X. Li, “Referring expression
comprehension using language adaptive inference,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 2357–2365.
[35] L. Yang, Y. Xu, C. Yuan, W. Liu, B. Li, and W. Hu, “Improving visual
grounding with visual-linguistic verification and iterative reasoning,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2022, pp. 9489–9498.
[36] X. Zhu, W. Su, L. Lu, B. Li, X. Wang, and J. Dai, “Deformable
DETR: Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection,” 2020,
arXiv:2010.04159.
[37] S. Liu et al., “DQ-DETR: Dual query detection transformer for phrase
extraction and grounding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 1728–1736.
[38] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and
S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020,
pp. 213–229.
[39] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer,
“High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 10684–10695.
[40] S. Chen, P. Sun, Y. Song, and P. Luo, “DiffusionDet: Diffusion model
for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct.
2023, pp. 19830–19843.
[41] S. Chen and B. Li, “Language-guided diffusion model for visual
grounding,” 2023, arXiv:2308.09599.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5647614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[42] X. Liu, S. Huang, Y. Kang, H. Chen, and D. Wang, “VGDIFFZERO:
Text-to-image diffusion models can be zero-shot visual grounders,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr.
2024, pp. 2765–2769.
[43] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020.
[44] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.6114.
[45] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang.
Technol., vol. 1, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[46] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[47] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[48] L. Xiong, N. Li, W. Qiu, Y. Luo, Y. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Re-UNet: A novel
multi-scale reverse U-shape network architecture for low-dose CT image
reconstruction,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 701–712,
Mar. 2024.
[49] C. Etmann, R. Ke, and C.-B. Schönlieb, “IUNets: Learnable invertible
up{-} and downsampling for large-scale inverse problems,” in Proc. IEEE
30th Int. Workshop Mach. Learn. Signal Process. (MLSP), Sep. 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[50] B. Sun, S. Jia, X. Jiang, and F. Jia, “Double U-Net CycleGAN for 3D
MR to CT image synthesis,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surgery,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 149–156, Aug. 2022.
[51] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. NIPS, 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[52] H. Rezatofighi, N. Tsoi, J. Gwak, A. Sadeghian, I. Reid, and S. Savarese,
“Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a loss for bounding
box regression,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 658–666.
[53] K. Li, G. Wan, G. Cheng, L. Meng, and J. Han, “Object detection in
optical remote sensing images: A survey and a new benchmark,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 159, pp. 296–307, Jan. 2020.
[54] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
2017, arXiv:1711.05101.
[55] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut, “ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language
representations,” 2019, arXiv:1909.11942.
[56] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
[57] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, 2021,
pp. 8748–8763.
[58] F. Liu et al., “RemoteCLIP: A vision language foundation model for
remote sensing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art.
no. 5622216.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuit and
system from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in
2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery at the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently a Full Professor with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of the Ministry of Education, Xidian University.
His research interests include remote sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remote
sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, please refer
to: https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/en/index.html

Ruitao Shen received the B.E. degree in computer
science and technology from Changzhou University,
Changzhou, China, in 2023. He is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in computer science and technology
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
His research interests include image understanding, visual grounding, and deep learning.

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding of the Ministry of Education, Xidian
University. Her research interests include computational intelligence and image understanding.

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is currently a Professor with the Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine
learning, and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.

Fang Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in
China, in 1990. She received the B.S. degree in
information and computing science from Henan
University, Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D.
degree in intelligent information processing from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently an Associate Professor with Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China. Her research interests include deep learning,
object detection, polarimetric SAR image classification, and change detection.

Licheng Jiao (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education of China. He has authored
or co-authored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include
signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet
theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is a member of the IEEE Xi’an Section Executive Committee
and an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition
Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:50:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

