IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

5614216

Multipretext-Task Prototypes Guided Dynamic
Contrastive Learning Network for Few-Shot Remote
Sensing Scene Classification
Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE, Weiquan Lin, Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu, Member, IEEE, and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— As a content management technique, remote sensing
(RS) scene classification (RSSC) always attracts researchers’
attention. In the past decades, many successful methods have
been proposed. Nevertheless, their prerequisite is that there are
large labeled datasets, which is a strict demand in practice.
To resolve this contradiction, developing RSSC models with the
help of few-shot learning (FSL) has become popular. Due to
lacking prior knowledge, most of the existing few-shot RSSC
models pay attention to the learning algorithm. However, they do
not attach importance to the complex contents within RS scenes
and the intricate interclass/intraclass relations between RS scenes.
This would influence their performance negatively. In this article,
we propose a new few-shot RSSC model named multipretext-task
prototypes guided dynamic contrastive learning network (MPCLNet). MPCL-Net consists of a multipretext tasks generation
submodule, a deep feature learning submodule, and a joint
optimization submodule. First, two RS-oriented pretext tasks are
constructed under the self-supervised learning (SSL) framework
in the multipretext tasks generation submodule, which aims to
explore multiscale and rotation-invariant information from RS
scenes. Second, a simple convolutional neural network (CNN) is
developed in the deep feature learning submodule to transform
the RS scenes into visual features. Third, three loss functions are
formulated and integrated into the joint optimization submodule.
Their goals are to fully capture the diverse land covers within
RS scenes and compact/separate the intraclass/interclass samples
with limited supervision. Finally, our MPCL-Net can be trained
in a meta way. The positive results counted on the three public
RS scene datasets confirm that our MPCL-Net is helpful to
RSSC tasks under the few-shot scenario. Our source codes are
available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/Remote-SensingImages-Classification/tree/main/MPCL.

Manuscript received 25 February 2023; revised 1 June 2023;
accepted 28 June 2023. Date of publication 30 June 2023; date of
current version 12 July 2023. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62171332 and
Grant 62276197, and in part by the Fund of National Key Laboratory
of Science and Technology on Remote Sensing Information and Imagery
Analysis, Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology, under Grant
6142A010301. (Corresponding author: Xu Tang.)
Jingjing Ma, Weiquan Lin, Xu Tang, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing 210094, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3291357, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3291357

Index Terms— Dynamic contrastive learning, few-shot
remote sensing scene classification (RSSC), multipretext tasks
self-supervised learning (SSL).

I. I NTRODUCTION

R

EMOTE sensing (RS) scene classification (RSSC) is an
important research topic in the RS community, which
aims to assign semantic labels to RS scenes according to
their contents [1], [2]. As a fundamental technique, RSSC
is widely used in various RS applications, such as change
detection [3], [4], contents mining [5], [6], geospatial object
detection [7], [8], and so on. With the rapid development
of deep learning, many RSSC methods have been proposed
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [9], and their
performance is impressive. However, those notable results rely
on a large number of labeled data. This strict requirement
limits their application to reality as the volume and covered
categories of labeled data are most of the time few and
incomplete in practical applications. Therefore, it is necessary
and urgent to develop RSSC models which can work on the
few-shot scenario. In other words, the expected RSSC models
should have two merits. One is that a few labeled samples can
train them, and the other is that they can distinguish the new
concepts.
To meet the above-mentioned demands, few-shot learning
(FSL) [10] has been developed in the RS community. As a
popular solution to FSL tasks, meta-learning [11] attracts
researchers’ attention due to its “learning to learn” mechanism.
Especially, in the current deep era, many deep meta-learning
algorithms have been proposed, and they have achieved success in various FSL tasks [12]. The existing meta-learning
methods can be divided into three categories, including
optimization-, model-, and metric-based technologies [13].
Optimization-based approaches [14], [15] aim at developing
specific optimization algorithms to make models learn rapidly
for new tasks. Model-based schemes [16], [17] focus on
learning their internal dynamics, which can be leveraged to
process and predict the new inputs. Metric-based ways [18],
[19] pay attention to finding a meta-feature space and adopting
the similarity comparisons to recognize the new tasks. In the
RS community, most few-shot RSSC methods [20], [21], [22]
are derived from metric-based meta-learning methods due to
their simple and clear meta-mechanisms.

1558-0644 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Although those methods have reached acceptable performance and generalization, some challenges in RSSC are still
to be solved. The satisfactory RSSC results cannot only
depend on the similarity measures. The effectiveness and
sufficient visual features for describing RS scenes are also
paramount [23]. Since RS scenes have diverse and abundant
land covers with multiscales, learning the useful visual features
is a tough task, especially in the few-shot scenario. A natural
way to address this problem is to expand the samples. However, annotating RS scenes is a time-consuming and laborious
task. In contrast to the labeled data, collecting the unlabeled
samples is easy. The rich information hidden in the big unlabeled data is beneficial for learning valuable features. Thus,
developing the method to explore the knowledge from RS
scenes without the assistance of manual annotation becomes
a critical issue for the above-mentioned challenges. To this
end, self-supervised learning (SSL) [24] draws researchers’
attention, which aims to use the data itself to be the supervised
information for completing the learning missions. A usual way
of SSL for image processing is pretext task learning, which
pushes the models to solve the predefined image-level tasks
so that the helpful information of images can be captured.
The common pretext tasks [25] are image jigsaw puzzles,
image rotation, and so on. Another popular SSL way to
image understanding is contrastive learning [26], which makes
models distinguish the images that have a high interclass
similarity or intraclass variance.
One problem is raised: is it possible to integrate the metricbased meta-learning and SSL to develop an expected RSSC
model? To achieve this goal, we propose a new model named
multipretext-task prototypes guided dynamic contrastive learning network (MPCL-Net) in this article. The main body of
MPCL-Net consists of a multipretext tasks generation submodule and a deep feature learning submodule. The former
aims to explore the multiscale and rotation-invariant information by constructing various pretext tasks under the SSL
framework. The latter focuses on mapping the RS scenes into
valuable visual features by a simple CNN. To train MPCLNet using a few labeled samples, we add a joint optimization
submodule at the top of MPCL-Net. This submodule involves
three specific loss functions, including a multipretext-task
SSL (MPT-SSL) loss, a multiview consistency FSL (MVCFSL) loss, and a prototype-based dynamic contrastive learning
(P-DCL) loss. By minimizing them jointly, our MPCL-Net can
be trained with small samples. Also, its generalization can be
guaranteed.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows.
1) An end-to-end RS scene classification model (MPCLNet) is proposed with the consideration of the characteristics of RS scenes. MPCL-Net can be trained with
small labeled RS samples and be used to distinguish the
new RS concepts.
2) To deeply explore the complex contents within RS
scenes, we introduce the SSL technique into our MPCLNet. Along with two RS-oriented pretext tasks and a
simple CNN, the valuable features that contain the multiscale and rotation-invariant knowledge can be mined
from RS scenes.

3) To make the proposed MPCL-Net meet the demands of
the few-shot scenario, three specific loss functions are
formulated based on the conventional meta loss. Their
function is to help MPCL-Net capture elegant information from RS scenes, maintain prediction consistency,
and address the interclass/intraclass problem. By optimizing them jointly in a meta-manner, our MPCL-Net
can be trained using a few labeled samples.
4) Extensive experiments conducted on three public RS
scene datasets show that the proposed model is helpful
to RS scene classification. Compared with many existing
methods, the performance and generation of MPCL-Net
are competitive.
The remaining sections are organized as follows. Related
work is reviewed in Section II. Then, the proposed MPCL-Net
is introduced in Section III. The evaluations of the proposed
method are given in Section IV, Finally, the conclusions are
summarized in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Deep Remote Sensing Scene Classification Model
With the help of CNNs, a large number of RSSC models
have been proposed in recent years. This section divides them
into two groups for a short review. In the first group, the
methods focus on improving the classification performance by
reducing the influence of intraclass variance and interclass similarity in RS scenes. For example, Cheng et al. [27] proposed
a discriminative CNN (D-CNN) to complete the RSSC tasks.
Apart from normal cross-entropy loss, the metric-learning loss
is developed in D-CNN to ensure the samples from the same
(different) classes can be close to (far away from) each other.
The positive results illustrate the superiorities of D-CNN. Similarly, another metric-learning-based deep model was proposed
in [28]. Based on the Siamese network, Chopra et al. [29]
design a metric learning regularization layer to enlarge or
decrease the distances between RS scenes from the same
or different classes. The reported results confirm its usefulness. Li et al. [30] first use the attention map technique to
obtain the salient parts of RS scenes. Then, a CNN model
with a new loss function is developed to further mine discriminative information and reduce the negative impacts of
interclass dispersion and intraclass variance. Tang et al. [31]
developed an attention-consistent network (ACNet) for RSSC.
First, ACNet leverages the channelwise and spatialwise attention mechanisms to capture the salient regions within RS
scenes. Then, the diverse salient regions are unified by an
attention-consistent scheme to obtain the normalized knowledge for RSSC tasks. After the above-mentioned operations,
not only can the key information hidden in RS scenes be
mined, but the problem of interclass/intraclass can also be
partly solved.
The approaches in the second group aim at exploring
the multiscale and rotation-invariant information from RS
scenes so that the models’ performance in RSSC can be
improved. Liu et al. [32] proposed a dual-branch multiscale
CNN to capture the multiscale knowledge fully. It consists of
a fixed-scale net and a varied-scale net. By forcing the outputs

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

of two nets close, the obtained visual features can describe the
scale information exactly. Thus, the RSSC results generated
by those features are adequate. To explore the information
comprehensively, a rotation invariance CNN was introduced
in [33]. It combines the specific data augmentation strategy and
rotation-invariant regularization to ensure the discrimination of
the final visual features. Consequently, the RSSC results can
be guaranteed. Lu et al. [34] introduced SIFT [35] into CNNs
and designed a bidirectional adaptive feature fusion strategy
to obtain the discriminative representation for RSSC. Since
fused features contain both semantic (global) and scale (local)
information, the classification results are as good as expected.
A multiscale staking attention pooling was introduced in [36]
to highlight the latent semantics and exploit the multiscale
information. Through embedding the residual attention strategy and multiscale dilated convolution layer into a CNN, the
effectiveness of the learned features and the accuracy of the
classification results can be ensured.
B. Meta-Learning in Remote Sensing
To deal with the few-shot problem and enhance the models’
generalization for diverse practical applications, meta-learning
has become popular in the RS community. Based on the
relational network [37], Gao et al. [38] proposed a new deep
model for classifying the hyperspectral image (HSI) under
the few-shot scenario. The authors first leverage the feature
learning module to capture the spatial–spectral information
from HSIs fully. Then, a task-based learning algorithm is
designed under the meta-learning paradigm to ensure that
model can classify the new HSIs. A meta-learning-based RS
object detection model was developed in [39], consisting of
a meta-feature extractor, a feature reweighting module, and
a bounding box prediction module. This model can not only
complete the detection task but also distinguish the unseen
objects in the RS images. Tang et al. [5] introduced the key
ideas of the prototype network [40] into the hash learning and
proposed a meta-hashing model for content-based RS image
retrieval. The improved metric-based meta-learning strategy
helps the model learn the valuable hash codes from RS images
using few labeled data.
For RSSC, meta-learning-based methods are also abundant.
For instance, Li et al. [20] proposed discriminative learning
of adaptive match network (DLA-MatchNet) under the metalearning framework. With the assistance of attention mechanisms and the adaptive distance matcher, DLA-MatchNet
can learn the discriminative features using a few labeled
samples to accomplish RSSC tasks. Another meta-learningbased model was proposed in [21], which completes the
feature learning at the task level and achieves the classification
results using the Balance loss function. In [22], a Siameseprototype network (SPNet) was developed to address few-shot
RSSC tasks. Considering the properties of RS scenes, SPNet
updates the normal prototype generation schemes. Along with
the specific loss functions, the RSSC results are encouraging. Cui et al. [41] embedded the kernel techniques into the
meta-learning framework and constructed meta-kernel networks (MKNs) for RSSC. By exploring the data distribution,

5614216

the discriminative classification bias can be obtained with limited supervised information. A multiscale multiangle network
and the corresponding class-level prototype guided learning
algorithm were proposed in [42] for RSSC. They aim to
capture the complex land covers within RS scenes based on
limited labels. The reported results confirm their helpfulness.
An aerial image few-shot dataset (AIFS-DATASET) was proposed in [43]. AIFS-DATASET consists of various datasets
so that its data distribution is diverse enough to evaluate FSL
algorithms comprehensively. At the same time, the authors
also developed a dual-constrained distance metric learning
(DC-DML) model in this article to deal with the FSL tasks
by narrowing down and enlarging the distances between the
intraclass and interclass samples.
C. Self-Supervised Learning in Remote Sensing
SSL study in RS is energetic as it can learn valuable information from RS images without supervision knowledge, which
can provide auxiliary messages for many RS applications. For
example, Dong et al. [44] designed a self-supervised strategy
for RS image change detection, in which the developed network is asked to complete the temporal prediction. In this way,
the model can mine the distribution-aware information from
temporal RS images, which is beneficial to change detection.
A self-supervised spectral–spatial residual network (SSRN)
was proposed for HSIs super-resolution [45]. The authors
first transform the super-resolution problem into a pixelwise
spectral mapping issue. Then, a self-supervised fine-tuning
scheme is developed to produce high spatial resolution HSIs.
Another SSL model was presented for RS image semantic
segmentation [46]. The encouraging segmentation results can
be obtained by developing the appropriate contrastive learning
modules for global styles and local regions.
In the RSSC tasks, SSL is also a prevailing technique.
Li et al. [46] developed a self-supervised contrastive learningbased metric learning network (SCL-MLNet) to accomplish
the few-shot RSSC tasks. First, SCL-MLNet incorporates
contrastive and FSL in a multitask learning framework to
obtain the representative features. Then, the attention method
is adopted to separate the samples from different classes.
The satisfactory classification results can be produced based
on the above-mentioned two stages. In [47], SSL is utilized
to generate a high-performance pretraining model for RSSC.
This operation can mitigate the burden of collecting labeled
data and improve classification performance. Considering the
complex contents within RS scenes and the limited supervision
information, Zhao et al. [48] leveraged the SSL to deal with
RSSC in a multitasking way. A new mixup loss strategy is
developed to weight different tasks dynamically so that the
discriminative features can be learned from RS scenes at a
small cost. The promising classification results confirm the
idea’s usefulness.
D. Similar Work Comparison
Our MPCL-Net aims to enhance the classification results
by combining FSL and SSL. Admittedly, some similar solutions have been proposed for image classification, such as

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

ProtoNetRot [49], SupBYOL [50], conditional self-supervised
(CSS) [51], and calibrated pretext tasks (CPT) [52]. Specifically, ProtoNetRot weaves a rotation pretext task (RPT) into
ProtoNet [40], where the model is required to predict the input
images’ rotation angles and complete FSL simultaneously.
Besides the rotation prediction, SupBYOL also introduces
another SSL task (representation prediction [53]) in the metalearning stage. This way, valuable features can be learned
from images under the FSL cases. Unlike the above-mentioned
two methods that complete SSL and FSL simultaneously, CSS
first accomplishes SSL (rotation forecast) and FSL separately.
Then, the knowledge learned from two tasks is fused by a
graph convolutional network (GCN) [54] module for the final
classification. CPT was developed for RS images, which adds
pretext task techniques and contrastive learning into the FSL
framework to ensure the final performance.
Although the targets of our MPCL-Net and the four methods
discussed earlier are similar, i.e., using SSL to improve FSL,
there are some differences between MPCL-Net and them. For
the first three methods (ProtoNetRot, SupBYOL, and CSS), the
different points are as follows. First, they are general-purpose
methods that are applied to natural images, while our model
is developed for RS images. Apart from the common RPT,
MPCL-Net also develops the scale pretext task (SPT) to
mine the multiscale information hidden in RS images, which
benefits RS scene classification. Second, the introduced SSL
technologies in the above three methods are pretext-task-based,
aiming to learn the profitable features from images by predicting the pseudolabels. Compared with them, besides developing
proper pretext tasks (RPT and SPT), we also introduce contrastive learning based on feature-level prototypes into our
model, which focuses on compacting the intraclass samples
and pushing away the interclass samples. Third, compared with
SupBYOL and CSS, the proposed MPCL-Net can be trained
without pretraining, which is beneficial to practical scenarios.
For RS-oriented CPT, there are still distinct differences.
First, CPT trains the base model in a supervised learning
way. In other words, it leverages the whole samples in the
training set directly to train the model along with a multiclass
classifier by reducing the cross-entropy values. In contrast to
CPT, our MPCL-Net trains the base model in an N-way-Kshot manner. The details of the N-way-K-shot learning will
be discussed in Section III-A. Second, CPT only contains
RPT, and MPCL-Net adopts RPT and SPT to guarantee the
effectiveness of the learned features. Third, CPT uses contrast
learning at the image level, and MPCL-Net applies contrast
learning at the prototype level.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Preliminary Knowledge
1) Meta-Learning: The data partition is a crucial step
in meta-learning [12], [13]. Suppose there is a dataset D
with a label space C, and the number of classes is M.
In general, the dataset would be divided into a training set
Dtrain , a validation set Dval , and a testing set Dtest under the
meta-learning framework. Their corresponding label subspaces
are disjoined and complementary, i.e., Ctrain ∩ Cval = ∅,

Ctrain ∩ Ctest = ∅, Cval ∩ Ctest = ∅, and C=Ctrain ∪ Cval ∪ Ctest .
Furthermore, the number of classes in different sets satisfies
M = Mtrain + Mval + Mtest . Meta-learning techniques train the
model on Dtrain , evaluate the performance of the model on
Dval , and assess the model’s generalization to unseen data of
Dtest .
In the training stage, suppose Dtrain contains Mtrain classes
with L samples per class. Since L is small, the meta-learning
algorithms use a set of tasks T instead of single samples to
train the deep models. This training paradigm is known as
episode training. Each task T consists of a support set Ds =
q
q
×Q
N ×K
, which are
{(xis , yis )}i=1
and a query set Dq = {(x j , y j )} Nj=1
randomly selected from Dtrain . Here, N (N < Mtrain ) indicates
the class numbers within support and query sets, K and Q
are the number of samples within per class and K + Q = L.
Then, the obtained N -way-K -shot task set T is used to train
the deep models using the following equation:
X
θ = arg min
L( f θ (T ))
(1)
θ

T

where f θ (·) indicates the deep mapping of nonlinear models
and L(·) denotes the loss function that usually measures the
prediction error on query sets. In the validation and testing
stage, the samples within Dval and Dtest should also be organized as tasks to complete the performance and generalization
assessment.
2) Metric-Based Baseline Model: Our MPCL-Net is developed based on the prototypical network (ProtoNet) [40]. Thus,
we introduce ProtoNet’s main idea in short. ProtoNet is a
simple yet classical metric-based meta-learning technique.
It leverages the distances between samples within the query
set and the prototypes to train the model under the few-shot
scenario. In detail, for a task T , ProtoNet first computes the
class-level prototypes using Dtrain according to
X
1
fis
(2)
cn =
K
s s
n
((xi ,yi )∈Ds )
where cn means the nth prototype, Dsn indicates a set of
samples with class n, fis denotes the embedding of xis ∈ Dsn .
p
Then, for a query sample x j , its class distribution can be
calculated by

q
exp −d f j , cn
q
q
(3)
p y j = n x j = PN

q
n=1 exp −d f j , cn
q

q

where f j indicates the embedding of x j , and d(·, ·) denotes
q
q
the Euclidean distance. By minimizing − log p(y j = n|x j ),
the parameters of the model can be updated by the task T .
When we expand the above-mentioned process to task set T ,
the model can be trained. In the reference stage, the class of a
new sample would also be decided by the distances between
the new sample and the corresponding prototypes.
B. Structure of the Proposed Network
The structure of the proposed MPCL-Net is shown in
Fig. 1, which consists of a multipretext tasks generation
submodule, a deep feature learning submodule, and a joint
optimization submodule. The multipretext tasks generation

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

Fig. 1.

5614216

Framework of the proposed MPCL-Net.

submodule focuses on preprocessing the input RS scenes and
defining the RS-oriented prepretext tasks. The deep feature
learning submodule aims to extract valuable information from
RS scenes. The joint optimization submodule considers formulating the specific loss functions to train our MPCL-Net
under the few-shot scenario. For clarity, we use a specific task
T as the example to explain each submodule of MPCL-Net in
the following.
The multipretext task generation submodule constructs two
pretext tasks, including SPT and RPT. In SPT, the multiscale
information hidden in RS scenes would be explored by randomly varying their sizes. Suppose we have a set of scale
operators G τ = {gτ |τ = 1, . . . , n τ }. For an input RS scene
with a size of u × u, we can use gτ to resize it into v × v,
where v equals u + τ · m or u − τ · m, and m denotes
the scaling margin. In RPT, the rotation-invariant messages
within the input RS scenes would be captured by the simple
rotation. Assume that there is a set of rotation operators
G r = {gr |r = 1, . . . , n r }. We can use gr to rotate an input RS
scene with (r −1)·90 degrees in the 2-D space. By constructing
SPT and RPT, an original input task T = {Ds , Dq } can be
transformed into two new tasks
 τ τ
Tτ =
D , D |τ = 1, . . . , n τ
 sr rq
r
T =
Ds , Dq |r = 1, . . . , n r
where
Dsτ =



Dsr =



xis , yis , τ

 N ×K

xis , yis , r



,

i=1
N ×K
,
i=1

Dqτ =

 N ×Q
q
q
x j , y j , τ j=1
 q q  N ×Q
Dqr = x j , y j , r j=1 .


Like [40], our deep feature learning submodule is a simple
network that consists of four convolutional blocks. Each block
contains a 3 × 3 convolutional layer, a rectified linear unit
(ReLU) layer, and a 2 × 2 MaxPool layer. Besides, there is
an additional 5 × 5 adaptive MaxPool layer in the last block.
After passing through the deep feature learning submodule,
the RS scenes within T τ and T r can be mapped into the ddimensional high-level visual features
 τ τ
Fτ =
F , F |τ = 1, . . . , n τ
 rs rq
r
F =
Fs , Fq |r = 1, . . . , n r

where
 q τ N ×Q
N ×K
, Fqτ = f j
i=1
j=1
 s r N ×K r
 q r N ×Q
r
Fs = fi
, Fq = f j
.
i=1
j=1

Fsτ =



fis

τ

When we obtain these representations, the joint optimization submodule will be utilized to update the parameters of
MPCL-Net. Three loss functions are developed to assist the
optimization process. The first one is the MPT-SSL loss, which
aims at deeply mining the valuable information from RS
scenes without any manual supervision. The second one is
the MVC-FSL loss. The functions of the MVC-FSL loss are
twofold. One is to ensure that our MPCL-Net can be trained
under the few-shot scenario. The other is to further capture
the knowledge hidden in RS scenes from various views. The
last one is the P-DCL loss, which focuses on addressing the
problems of interclass similarity and intraclass variance using
a few labeled samples. Now, we discuss three loss functions
in detail.

C. Learning Algorithm for the Proposed Network
To obtain a model with good performance and high generalization using a few labeled samples, we develop the learning
algorithm under the meta-learning paradigm. Here, we also use
a specific task T = {Ds , Dq } to clarify the proposed learning
algorithm. The whole training process would be completed
using a set of tasks T . As mentioned in Section III-B, when
the task T is passed through the multipretext tasks generation
and deep feature learning submodules, we can get two pretext
tasks T τ and T r , and the corresponding RS scenes can be
mapped into the high-level features Fτ and Fr . Next, three
loss functions are developed to guide the learning process.
Since the loss functions of SPT and RPT are similar, we only
define the different functions for SPT here for clarity. The
definitions of the three loss functions for RPT can be found
in the Supplementary Material.
1) MPT-SSL Loss: This loss function is developed to help
MPCL-Net mine the profitable information from RS scenes
without manual labels. To this end, the self-supervised scale
nτ
nr
and rotation labels {τi }i=1
and {ri }i=1
are used. For convenience, we combine the support and query sets and redefine

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023
q τ

Fτ and Fr as

query samples {(f j ) |τ = 1, . . . , n τ } according to (6). The
MVC term is defined as

n
o
N (K +Q)
|τ = 1, . . . , n τ
fiτ i=1
o
n
N (K +Q)
|r = 1, . . . , n r .
Fr =
fir i=1

Fτ =

Lτcon =

Then, a scale loss and a rotation loss are formulated.
For T τ , we develop a scale classifier θτ , consisting of a
1 × 1 convolutional layer and an ReLU activation function.
The scale classifier realizes the mapping θτ : fiτ 7→ τi for
(fiτ , τi ) ∈ F τ . To recognize the diverse scale variations, the
scale loss is formulated as follows for the feature pair (fiτ , τi ):

nτ
X
exp θτ fiτ , τi
1 X
τ
 (4)
log Pn τ
Lssl = −
τ
′
n τ l τ =1 τ
′ =1 exp θτ fi , τi
τ
τ
(fi ,τi )∈F
where l = N (K + Q). For T , we construct a rotation classifier
θr , whose structure is the same as θτ . The rotation classifier
completes the mapping θr : fir 7 → ri for (fir , ri ) ∈ F r . For the
feature pair (fir , ri ), similar to Eq. (4), the rotation loss Lrssl can
be defined to ensure the various rotations can be distinguished.
Finally, the MPT-SSL loss is the combination of the scale loss
and rotation loss
r

Lssl = Lτssl + Lrssl .
mpt

(5)

2) MVC-FSL Loss: This loss function has the FSL term and
the MVC term. The FSL term guarantees that our MPCL-Net
can be trained with limited labeled samples. The MVC term
ensures that MPCL-Net can consistently predict the pretexted
samples corresponding to the same RS scene.
For the RS scenes in

 s s 
q
q
Tτ =
xi , yi , τ , x j , y j , τ |τ = 1, . . . , n τ .
We have already obtained their features
 τ τ
Fτ =
Fs , Fq |τ = 1, . . . , n τ
 s τ
q τ
|τ = 1, . . . , n τ .
=
fi , f j
By the deep feature learning submodule, where i ∈
[1, N × K ], j ∈ [1, N × Q], N denotes the class number
in T τ , K and Q indicate the numbers of the support and
query samples, respectively. Similar to [40], the FSL term is
formulated as
n

τ

1 X
q
q
log p τ y j = n x j , τ
n τ τ =1

q τ

exp −d f j , cτn
q
q
τ
p y j = n x j , τ = PN

q τ
, cτn
n=1 exp −d f j
τ
1 X
cτn =
fis
(6)
K s τ τ
(fi ) ∈Fs n

Lτfsl = −

where Fτs n indicates a set of features with class n, and cτn
denotes the prototype corresponding to the nth class. Inspired
by [55], we leverage the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
to ensure prediction consistency. Suppose we have gotten
the posterior probability distributions {pτj |τ = 1, . . . , n τ } for

NQ
nτ X
X

1
·
mean pτj log pτj − log p̂τj
n τ N Q τ =1 j=1
n

p̂τj =

τ
1 X
pτ
n τ τ =1 j

(7)

where mean(·) denotes the elemental average operation, and
p̂τj implies the center prediction distributions of the pretexted
samples from one RS scene. Therefore, the MVC-FSL loss
function for T τ can be formulated as
Lτmvcfsl = Lτfsl + ητ Lτcon

(8)

where ητ is a free parameter to control the contributions of
Lτfsl and Lτcon .
Similarly, for the RS samples in
 s s 

q
q
Tr =
xi , yi , r , x j , y j , r |r = 1, . . . , n r
and their features
Fr =



=



Fsr , Fqr |r = 1, . . . , n r
r
q r
|r = 1, . . . , n r .
fis , f j

The same process is done. Thus, the MVC-FSL loss function
for T r can be formulated as
Lrmvcfsl = Lrfsl + ηr Lrcon

(9)

where Lrfsl and Lrcon are the FSL and MVC terms for the
rotational task, and ηr is a hyperparameter to balance the
efforts of two terms.
Consequently, the MVC-FSL loss function is

1 τ
Lmvcfsl + Lrmvcfsl
2
 ητ
1 τ
ηr
=
Lfsl + Lrfsl + Lτcon + Lrcon
2
2
2


1 τ
r
τ
∼
Lfsl + Lfsl + η Lcon + Lrcon
{z
}
|2
{z
} |

Lmvc
fsl =

FSL Term

(10)

MVC Term

where η is an empirical parameter for the FSL and MVC
terms, and ∼ means the equivalence.
3) P-DCL Loss: To compact/separate the intraclass and
interclass samples, we develop the P-DCL loss in this section
with the help of contrastive learning. A critical step in
contrastive learning is constructing the positive and negative
data according to the anchor sample [26]. Such that the
samples corresponding to the same/different classes can be
clustered/split. We apply these critical ideas to the prototypes
and develop the P-DCL loss. Compared with the regular
contrastive learning networks (e.g., [56], [57]), which collect
the anchors and their positive and negative data pairs in
the preprocessing stage at the image level, the anchors and
corresponding data pairs in our P-DCL loss are the immediate
class-level prototypes (generated during the training) and their
variants. Therefore, the P-DCL loss can be regarded as a
dynamic technique.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

Fig. 2.

5614216

Architecture of the learnable sample generator.

For T τ , suppose we have obtained N prototypes CτN =
= 1, . . . , n τ }. First, we regard each prototype as the
anchor and construct its positive and negative samples by
a learnable sample generator (LSG), whose architecture is
shown in Fig. 2. LSG consists of two 1 × 1 convolutional
layers, one ReLU layer, and a Softmax layer. The inputs of
LSG are the prototypes CτN , and the outputs are two hyperparameters sets AτN and BτN . After disturbing and the linear
combination operations, we can get the positive and negative
samples. The above-mentioned process can be formulated as

+
CτN = AτN · CτN + BτN · Shuffle CτN

−
CτN = BτN · CτN + AτN · Shuffle CτN


AτN , BτN = f lsg CτN
(11)
{cτn |τ

where f lsg (·) denotes the nonlinear mapping of LSG, Shuffle(·)
N
means the shuffle operation, and AτN = {αnτ }n=1
and BτN =
τ N
τ
τ
{βn }n=1 are hyperparameter sets. Here, αn and βn should obey
the rules: αnτ + βnτ = 1 and αnτ > βnτ . Then, derived from
InfoNCE [58], the P-DCL loss for T τ is defined as
1
Lτdcl = −
nτ


 D τ τ+ E 
cn ,cn
exp
nτ X
N


ε
X


D
E
·
log

−


τ ,cτ
+


τ
τ
c
P
n n′
c ,c
τ =1 n=1
exp ⟨ n ε n ⟩ + nN′ =1 exp
ε
(12)
where ε is a temperature hyperparameter and ⟨·, ·⟩ implies the
inner product. The target of Lτdcl is to narrow down the distance
between the anchor and its positive sample and enlarge the gap
between the anchor and its negative sample.
To further explain how to produce the positive/negative
samples, a schematic illustration of positive sample generation under the five-way-K-shot scenario for the SPTs is
provided in Fig. 3. Suppose there are five prototypes Cτ5 =
{cτ1 , cτ2 , cτ3 , cτ4 , cτ5 }. After passing them through LSG, we can
get two sets of hyperparameters Aτ5 = {α1τ , α2τ , α3τ , α4τ , α5τ }
and Bτ5 = {β1τ , β2τ , β3τ , β4τ , β5τ }. Then, the original prototypes
Cτ5 and its Shuffle version would be combined linearly with
+
the weights of Aτ5 and Bτ5 to generate Cτ5 . Since we define
+
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
αi > βi and αi + βi = 1, C5 has a higher weight in Cτ5 .
τ+
Therefore, C5 can be regarded as the positive samples of Cτ5 .
Similarly, when we can get the positive and negative sam+
−
ples CrN and CrN of the prototypes CrN = {crn |r = 1, . . . , n r },
we can also get the P-DCL loss Lrdcl for T r whose definition
can be deduced by (12). Finally, the ultimate P-DCL loss is
formulated as
Ldcl = Lτdcl + Lrdcl .
p

(13)

Fig. 3.
Schematic illustration of positive sample generation under the
five-way-K-shot scenario for the SPTs.

Algorithm 1 Steps of Training MPCL-Net
Input:
A labeled dataset that contains M classes with L samples
per class, the maximum iterations iterMax.
1: for i = 1 to iterMax do;
2: Construct one training task T ;
3: Generate scale pretext task T τ and rotation pretext task
T r using T according to the scheme mentioned in Section
III-B;
4: Pass the multi-pretext tasks through the deep feature
learning submodule to get their d−dimensional features
Fτ and Fr .
5: Compute multi-view prototypes CτN and CrN ;
mpt
mpt
mpt
6: Calculate Lssl , Lssl and Lssl by Eqs. 5, 10, and 13;
7: Calculate the final loss Ltotal by Eq. 14 and update
the MPCL-Net’s parameters by the back propagation
algorithm.
8: end for.
Output:
The trained MPCL-Net.

4) Total Loss: Based on the contents discussed earlier, the
loss function for training our MPCL-Net is
mpt

p

Ltotal = Lmvc
fsl + λ1 Lssl + λ2 Ldcl

(14)

where λ1 and λ2 are two hyperparameters to control the
significance of different terms. Besides, we summary the
training steps in Algorithm 1.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets Description
UC
Merced
Land-Use
(UCM)1
[59]
contains
2100 256 × 256 RS scenes images belonging to 21 semantic
categories. Each category has 100 RS scenes. The spatial
resolution of scenes is one foot. The semantics of each class
and the number of scenes within each class are exhibited
in Fig. 4. In our experiments, the dataset is divided into
ten, six, and five classes for training, validation, and testing,
respectively, and the exact splits are shown in Table I.
AID2 [60] consists of 31 500 600 × 600 RS scenes, which
are grouped into 30 classes. The scene numbers of each class
1 http://vision.ucmerced.edu/datasets/landuse.html
2 https://captain-whu.github.io/AID/

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 4. Examples of scenes of the UCM dataset. The scene numbers and
names are summarized as follows. 1) Agricultural. 2) Airplane. 3) Baseball
diamond. 4) Beach. 5) Buildings. 6) Chaparral. 7) Dense residential. 8) Forest.
9) Freeway. 10) Golf course. 11) Harbor. 12) Intersection. 13) Medium-density
residential. 14) Mobile home park. 15) Overpass. 16) Parking lot. 17) River.
18) Runway. 19) Sparse residential. 20) Storage tanks. 21) Tennis courts.

are varied from 200 to 400. The pixel resolution of each image
ranges from 8 to 1.5 m. The semantics of different classes and
the number of scenes corresponding to each class are exhibited
in Fig. 5. For the aerial image dataset (AID), 16 classes are
randomly chosen as the training set, seven classes are selected
as the validation set, and the remaining seven classes are
regarded as the test set (see Table I for detail).
NWPU-RESISC453 [61] has 31 500 256 × 256 RS scenes,
and they are divided into 45 semantic classed equally. Their
spatial resolution varies from 30 to 0.2 m. The examples are
exhibited in Fig. 6. In the following experiments, 25 classes
are selected as the training set, ten classes are regarded as the
validation set, and the rest of the ten classes are regarded as
the test set, as shown in Table I.

Fig. 5. Examples of scenes of the AID dataset. The scene numbers and names
are summarized as follows. 1) Airport. 2) Bare land. 3) Baseball field. 4)
Beach. 5) Bridge. 6) Center. 7) Church. 8) Commercial. 9) Dense residential.
10) Desert. 11) Farmland. 12) Forest. 13) Industrial. 14) Meadow. 15) Medium
residential. 16) Mountain. 17) Park. 18) Parking. 19) Playground. 20) Pond.
21) Port. 22) Railway station. 23) Resort. 24) River. 25) School. 26) Sparse
residential. 27) Square. 28) Stadium. 29) Storage tanks. 30) Viaduct.

B. Implementation Details
Following the most commonly used meta-learning protocol,
we perform five-way one-shot and five-way five-shot classification. We implement our model in the PyTorch platform4 and
run our experiment on two Amax GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs.
In the meta-training stage, the adaptive momentum estimation
algorithm (ADAM) is used to optimize the parameters of our
model. The initial learning rate is set as 1 × 10−4 and the
maximum iterations are set to be 4000. We train the model
from scratch without pretrained weights for each dataset. All
the input images are resized to 224 × 224. In the meta-testing
phase, both SPT and RPT are used to output the classification
results for testing images to improve the performance with the
help of multiscale and rotation-invariant information.
Several parameters should be set in advance, including the
number of the scale and rotation operators n τ and n r , the
scaling margin m, the empirical parameter η in the MVC-FSL
loss [see (10)], the temperature parameter ε in the P-DCL loss
[see (12)], and the hyperparameter λ1 and λ2 in total loss [see
(14)]. The optimal values of λ1 , λ2 , and m for different datasets
and diverse few-shot scenarios are exhibited in Table II, and
their influence on our model will be discussed in Section IV-F.
For η, as suggested by [55] and [62], we set its value to
3 https://gcheng-nwpu.github.io/#Datasets
4 https://pytorch.org/

Fig. 6. Examples of scenes of the NWPU-RESISC45 dataset. The scene
numbers and names are summarized as follows. 1) Airplane. 2) Airport. 3)
Baseball diamond. 4) Basketball court. 5) Beach. 6) Bridge. 7) Chaparral. 8)
Church. 9) Circular farmland. 10) Cloud. 11) Commercial area. 12) Dense
residential. 13) Desert. 14) Forest. 15) Freeway. 16) Golf course. 17) Ground
track field. 18) Harbor. 19) Industrial area. 20) Intersection. 21) Island. 22)
Lake. 23) Meadow. 24) Medium residential. 25) Mobile home park. 26)
Mountain. 27) Overpass. 28) Palace. 29) Parking lot. 30) Railway. 31) Railway
station. 32) Rectangular farmland. 33) River. 34) Roundabout. 35) Runway.
36) Sea ice. 37) Ship. 38) Snowberg. 39) Sparse residential. 40) Stadium. 41)
Storage tank. 42) Tennis court. 43) Terrace. 44) Thermal power station. 45)
Wetland.

0.1. Its impact on our MPCL-Net will also be analyzed in
Section IV-F. Besides, we set n τ = n r = 4 and ε = 0.1 for
the following experiments. The reasons why we fix their values
are twofold. First, since the valid rotation angles in RPT are
{0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , 270◦ }, the value of n r is decided to be four.
Spontaneously, n τ is equal to four. Second, similar to [58]
and [56], we set the temperature parameter ε to be 0.1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

5614216

TABLE I
DATA S PLITS ON T HREE DATASETS

TABLE II
E MPIRICALLY O PTIMAL VALUES OF m, AND λ1 AND λ2 FOR D IFFERENT
DATASETS AND D IFFERENT T RAINING TASKS

We adopt overall accuracy (OA) as our assessment criteria
to evaluate the proposed method. OA is defined as the number
of correctly classified samples divided by the total number of
scenes in the dataset, and it reflects the overall classification
performance.
C. Performance of Our Model
To validate our MPCL-Net extensively, we compare it
with the following ten models, including matching network (MatchingNet) [63], relation network (RelationNet) [37],
ProtoNet [40], ProtoNetRot [49], SupBYOL [50], DLAMatchNet [20], SPNet [22], SCL-MLNet [46], CPT [52], and
DC-DML [43]. The first five models are general-purpose FSL
networks, and the last five are RS-oriented FSL networks.
Their publication information can be found in Table III.
Note that all models are accomplished by ourselves using the
released codes, and their free parameters are set according to
the original literature. In addition, for the sake of fairness, the
experimental settings of the compared methods are the same
as the contents discussed in Section IV-B. There is another
point we want to touch on: CPT trains the base model in a
supervised manner. This training way is different from our Nway-K-shot manner. To make a fair comparison between CPT
and our MPCL-Net, we replace the supervised learning way
in CPT with the N-way-K-shot training manner.
1) Results of the UCM Dataset: The classification performance of MPCL-Net and the compared methods counted
on the UCM dataset is summarized in Table III, from
where we can easily find that our MPCL-Net outperforms
other models in all cases. Taking the five-way one-shot
scenario as an example, compared with the other mod-

els, the improvements achieved by MPCL-Net in OAs
are 8.71% (MatchingNet), 4.78% (ProtoNet), 6.52% (RelationNet), 2.36% (ProtoNetRot), 0.98% (SupBYOL), 3.83%
(DLA-MatchNet), 3.62% (SPNet), 2.02% (SCL_MLNet),
0.74% (CPT), and 0.77% (DC_DML), respectively. The significant performance gaps between MPCL-Net and other methods
illustrate the effectiveness of our model. Also, compared with
the other methods, the standard deviations of MPCL-Net are
the lowest. This implies that the feature learning ability of
MPCL-Net is strong, and its behavior is stable when the
volume of training data is limited. The reasons for these
encouraging results can be summarized as follows. First, our
model can capture complex semantic information from RS
images owing to the RS-oriented pretext tasks. Second, due to
the multiview consistency strategy proposed in the MVC-FSL
loss, the robustness of MPCL-Net can be ensured. Last but
not least, the P-DCL loss enhances the generalization of our
MPCL-Net to the unseen classes.
2) Results of the AID Dataset: The OA values and standard deviations of different methods counted on the AID
dataset are exhibited in Table III. Our model’s classification behavior is the strongest among all the methods. For
the five-way one-shot scenario, compared with the other
methods, the OA improvements achieved by MPCL-Net
are 12.05% (MatchingNet), 3.43% (ProtoNet), 3.02% (RelationNet), 2.29% (ProtoNetRot), 1.31% (SupBYOL), 1.83%
(DLA-MatchNet), 2.59% (SPNet), 1.59% (SCL_MLNet),
0.66% (CPT), and 0.53% (DC_DML). For the five-way fiveshot scenario, the OA enhancements obtained by MPCL-Net
are 18.43% (MatchingNet), 5.24% (ProtoNet), 11.48% (RelationNet), 2.76% (ProtoNetRot), 1.30% (SupBYOL), 5.82%
(DLA-MatchNet), 4.19% (SPNet), 4.20% (SCL_MLNet),
2.72% (CPT), and 1.61% (DC_DML). These positive results
demonstrate that the proposed MPCL-Net is helpful to the
AID dataset.
3) Results of the NWPU-RESISC45 Dataset: The performance of different methods counted on the NWPU-RESISC45
dataset is shown in Table III. MPCL-Net achieves the best
performance in the five-way five-shot scenario. In comparison
with other methods, the improvements achieved by MPCL-Net
are 30.33% (MatchingNet), 2.13% (ProtoNet), 5.10% (Rela-

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE III
OA (%) OF MPCL-N ET AND OTHER M ETHODS ON T HREE DATASETS

tionNet), 1.46% (ProtoNetRot), 0.40% (SupBYOL), 0.38%
(DLA-MatchNet), 1.85% (SPNet), 0.76% (SCL_MLNet),
0.91% (CPT), and 0.06% (DC_DML). However, MPCL-Net
cannot reach what we expect in the five-way one-shot scenario,
whose behavior is weaker than that of DLA-MatchNet and
RelationNet. This is because DLA-MatchNet and RelationNet
adopt nonlinear classifiers, which would benefit the classification tasks when the number of classes is large, and the
supervision information is limited. Similar observations can be
found in [21] and [46]. Nevertheless, embedding the nonlinear
classifier would increase the model’s complexity. Thus, we still
prefer adopting the linear classifier into our model. One of our
future works is to improve the linear classifier-based model’s
classification performance in this kind of difficult classification
scenario.
Apart from the numerical results discussed earlier, we study
MPCL-Net’s performance by visualizing the learned features
using the t-SNE [64] algorithm. Here, we use the ski-learn
library to execute the t-SNE algorithm. The function name
is “TSNE,” and the parameters are “n_components = 2,”
“init = pca,” and “random_state = 0,” where “n_components”
indicates the dimension of the embedded space, “init”
implies the initialization manner of embedding, and “random_state” decides the random number generator. Apart from
the above-mentioned three parameters, other input parameters
for the TSNE function equal the default values. The feature
distributions of the testing data under the five-way one-shot
and five-way five-shot scenarios are exhibited in Figs. 7
and 8, respectively. Due to the experimental settings (fiveway), only five classes are selected from the testing sets to
complete the feature distribution exhibition. For UCM, the
selected five classes are “Beach,” “Golf Course,” “Mobile
Home Park,” “River,” and “Tennis Courts,” and they are
numbered 1–5 in Figs. 7 and 8. For AID, the five classes are
“Desert,” “Railway Station,” “Sparse Residential,” “Storage
Tanks,” and “Viaduct.” Their numbers in Figs. 7 and 8 are 6–
10. For NWPU-RESISC45, the five classes contain “Airport,”
“Basketball Court,” “Circular Farmland,” “Dense Residential,”
and “Forest,” and their numbers are 11–15 in Figs. 7 and 8.
Here, the distributions of features learned by ProtoNet are also
displayed for reference.

By observing Figs. 7 and 8, we can find that the
discrimination of the features learned by our MPCL-Net is
higher than that of ProtoNet in all cases. Taking the AID
dataset and five-way five-shot setting as an example, the
features obtained by ProtoNet are mixed, which cannot
provide valuable information for scene classification. While
the clusters of the features generated by our model are
separable, the distances between different clusters are
relatively apparent. Therefore, they can support discriminative
clues for scene classification tasks. These positive results
confirm the usefulness of our MPCL-Net.
D. Ablation Study of Loss Function
As said in Section III, the proposed MPCL-Net is developed
based on ProtoNet, and it consists of a multipretext tasks
generation submodule (SPT and RPT), a deep feature learning
submodule (ProtoNet), and a joint optimization submodule
(MPT-SSL, MVC-FSL, and P-DCL losses). To study their contributions to MPCL-Net, we construct the following networks.
1) Net-0: ProtoNet (with FSL loss).
2) Net-1: RPT + ProtoNet (with RPT-SSL and FSL losses).
3) Net-2: SPT + ProtoNet (with SPT-SSL and FSL losses).
4) Net-3: RPT + SPT + ProtoNet (with MPT-SSL and FSL
losses).
5) Net-4: RPT + SPT + ProtoNet (with MPT-SSL and
MVC-FSL losses).
6) Net-5: RPT + SPT + ProtoNet (with MPT-SSL, MVCFSL, and P-DCL losses).
Net-0 is the original ProtoNet, i.e., the deep feature learning
submodule. Net-1 and Net-2 are the combinations of the
deep feature learning submodule and the rotation-/scale-pretext
tasks generation submodule. Net-3 is our MPCL-Net with the
MPT-SSL and MVC-FSL losses. Net-4 is our MPCL-Net.
The results of various networks counted on three datasets
are shown in Table IV. Note that the experimental settings
are the same as the contents mentioned in Section IV-B. From
observing these results, we can find the following points. First,
Net-1 and Net-2 are better than Net-0 since SPT and RPT can
help the model capture the rich information from RS scenes.
After combining SPT and RPT into MPT-SSL, the behavior

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

5614216

Fig. 7. t-SNE plots of tested embedding under five-way one-shot scenario. The scene numbers and names from three datasets are summarized as follows.
UCM—1) Beach. 2) Golf course. 3) Mobile home park. 4) River.5) Tennis courts. AID—6) Desert. 7) Railway station. 8) Sparse residential. 9) Storage
tanks. 10) Viaduct. NWPU-RESISC45—11) Airport. 12) Basketball court. 13) Circular farmland. 14) Dense residential. 15) Forest. (a) MPCL-Net on UCM.
(b) MPCL-Net on AID. (c) MPCL-Net on NWPU-RESISC45. (d) ProtoNet on UCM. (e) ProtoNet on AID. (f) ProtoNet on NWPU-RESISC45.

Fig. 8. t-SNE plots of tested embedding under five-way five-shot scenario. The scene numbers and names from three datasets are summarized as follows.
UCM—1) Beach. 2) Golf course. 3) Mobile home park. 4) River. 5) Tennis courts. AID—6) Desert. 7) Railway station. 8) Sparse residential. 9) Storage
tanks. 10) Viaduct. NWPU-RESISC45—11) Airport. 12) Basketball court. 13) Circular farmland. 14) Dense residential. 15) Forest. (a) MPCL-Net on UCM.
(b) MPCL-Net on AID. (c) MPCL-Net on NWPU-RESISC45. (d) ProtoNet on UCM. (e) ProtoNet on AID. (f) ProtoNet on NWPU-RESISC45.

of Net-3 becomes stronger, which explicitly indicates the
effectiveness of our multipretext tasks generation submodule
and the MPT-SSL loss. Furthermore, when our MVC-FSL loss
replaces the original FSL loss, Net-4 outperforms Net-3 in all
cases, and its standard deviations are less than Net-3 on three
datasets. This implies the positive influence of the MVC term.
Adding the proposed P-DCL loss to Net-4, the classification
results of Net-5 are better than that of Net-4, which shows
the importance of the dynamic contrastive learning strategy in
RSSC. In sum, each part of MPCL-Net plays a positive role
in the final classification.

E. Statistical Test
To further evaluate the differences between the proposed
MPCL-Net and the comparison methods, we adopt the
Wilcoxon rank sum test [65], [66], [67], which is a nonparametric statistical test method. Particularly, all methods are
randomly carried out in 30 rounds to construct the various
OA pairs. Then, the Wilcoxon rank sum test (0.05 significant
level) is calculated between different OA pairs. In general,
the test results would be symbolized by “+,” “−,” and “=,”
where “+” and “−” indicate that there is a difference between

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE IV
OA (%) OF D IFFERENT A BLATION M ODELS ON T HREE DATASET

TABLE V
W ILCOXON R ANK S UM T EST (0.05 S IGNIFICANCE L EVEL ) OF MPCL-N ET AND OTHER M ETHODS ON T HREE DATASETS

MPCL-Net and the compared method, and “=” denotes no
difference exists. Furthermore, “−” implies that the performance of MPCL-Net is better than the compared method, and
“+” shows the opposite. The test results are summarized in
Table V. We can easily find that there is no “=,” indicating that
the proposed MPCL-Net differs from the selected compared
models. Besides, apart from the five-way one-shot scenario
of NWPU, the MPCL-Net achieves the best performance,
which is consistent with the information presented in Table III.
These investigations demonstrate that the proposed method
over different methods is statistically significant.

F. Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, we study the influence of empirical parameters on the proposed model, including the empirical parameters
λ1 and λ2 [see (14)], the scaling margin m, and the hyperparameter η [see (10)]. To this end, we train a set of MPCL-Nets
with different parameters. Then, their performance is counted
on different datasets under the five-way one-shot scenario.
In particular, the values of λ1 , λ2 , and η are varied from 0.1 to
1.0 with an interval of 0.1, and the values of m are changed
from −40 to 40 with an interval of 10 (except 0). The results
are shown in Fig. 9. Note that only one parameter is turned
at a time, and the others are set according to the contents
described in Section IV-B.
From the observation of Fig. 9(a), we can find that
the optimal values of λ1 are 0.5 (UCM), 0.1 (AID), and
0.9 (NWPU-RESISC45). For UCM, the performance of
MPCL-Net increases when λ1 is varied from 0.1 to 0.5. When
λ1 > 0.5, the behavior of our model becomes weaker but
stable. For AID, the performance trend of MPCL-Net is down

with the increase of λ1 . Inversely, MPCL-Net’s behavior on
NWPU-RESISC45 becomes stronger when λ1 gets bigger.
By investigating Fig. 9(b), it is easy to find that the peak
values of λ2 appear at 0.5 (UCM), 0.3 (AID), and 0.5 (NWPURESISC45). Similar to λ1 , the performance of MPCL-Net
gradually increases with time at first and then decreases.
The demarcation point is λ2 = 0.5. Contrast to λ1 , when
λ2 ̸= 0.3 and λ2 ̸= 0.5 the proposed model’s performance
on AID and NWPU-RESISC45 is approximately equal. These
discoveries suggest that the satisfactory λ2 can be found at
around 0.5.
For m [see Fig. 9(c)], its optimal values are −40 (UCM),
−30 (AID), and −30 (NWPU-RESISC45). As a whole, the
performance trend of MPCL-Net for three datasets is down
when m increases. Also, when the values of m are positive,
the behavior of various MPCL-Nets becomes steady. Those
findings imply that shrinking RS scenes is beneficial to our
model.
For η, by investigating the bars, we can find that the
optimal performance appears when η = 0.1, and the behavior
of MPCL-Nets gets weaker with the increasing η. This is
because the MVC term in the MVC-FSL loss focuses on
improving the model stability by the multiview consistent
prediction. However, when its weight grows, it pushes the
model to generate similar (or even the same) features for
samples of different views. Therefore, the discrimination of
the final feature representation would be reduced so that the
classification results would be influenced negatively.
G. Influence of Training Samples Volume
To further study how the number of training data affects our
model, we conduct the experiments under various five-way-K -

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

5614216

Fig. 9.

Influence of empirical parameters on the proposed model. (a) λ1 . (b) λ2 . (c) m. (d) η.

Fig. 10.

Performance of MPCL-Net under various five-way K -shot scenarios counted on three datasets. (a) UCM. (b) AID. (c) NWPU.

TABLE VI
PARAMETERS (M B) AND I NFERENCE T IMES (s) OF D IFFERENT A BLATION
N ETWORKS U NDER F IVE -WAY O NE -S HOT S CENARIO C OUNTED ON
THE UCM DATASET

shot scenarios by changing the number of shots from 1 to 10.
The results counted on three datasets are displayed in Fig. 10.
Note that the free parameters of MPCL-Net are the same
as the five-way one-shot and five-way five-shot cases when
K < 5 and K ≥ 5. We can easily find that the behavior
of our MPCL-Net becomes stronger when the number of
shots increases. Furthermore, when shots rise from 1 to 5, the
MPCL-Net’s performance enhancements are distinct. When
shots are raised from 5 to 10, the performance of MPCL-Net
is improved steadily. The above-mentioned investigations confirm that the proposed MPCL-Net performs reasonably when
the number of training samples changes.
H. Parameters and Inference Times
To study the efficiency of our MPCL-Net, we count its
parameters and inference time under a five-way one-shot
scenario on the UCM dataset. First, we count the parameters
volume and inference times of each part of MPCL-Net. To this

TABLE VII
PARAMETERS (M B) AND I NFERENCE T IMES (s) OF MPCL-N ET AND C OM PARED M ETHODS U NDER F IVE -WAY O NE -S HOT S CENARIO C OUNTED
ON THE UCM DATASET

end, the networks constructed in the ablation study section
(Section IV-D) are used. Their parameter sizes and inference
times are summarized in Table VI. We find that the multipretext tasks generation submodule makes the inference times
longer distinctly, and the P-DCL loss increases the model’s
parameters dramatically. These observations are reasonable
because: 1) compared with the single pretext, preparing SPT
and RPT is a time-consuming process and 2) the positive
and negative sample generation procedure for the P-DCL loss
would multiply the model’s sizes.
Second, the compared models’ parameters volume and
inference times are counted for comparison (see Table VII).
For the parameters, we can observe that MPCL-Net
is significantly lighter than ReLationNet, DLA-MatchNet,
SCL_MLNet, and DC_DML. Although our model is more

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

complex than others, the parameter increments are slight. As a
whole, the proposed MPCL-Net is not a heavy model. For the
inference times, MPCL-Net is relatively time-consuming. This
is because of the multipretext tasks generation submodule.
In other words, most time is spent on constructing the pretext
tasks. Fortunately, considering the positive classification performance, a longer inference procedure is not an unacceptable
issue. Speeding up our model is one of our future works.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article presents a new network for few-shot RSSC
tasks named MPCL-Net. First, a multipretext tasks generation
submodule is developed under the SSL framework to explore
the complex contents hidden in RS scenes from the multiscale
(SPT) and rotation-invariant (RPT) aspects. Then, a simple
yet useful CNN is adopted to map the RS scenes into useful
deep features. Finally, a specific loss function with MPTSSL, MVC-FSL, and P-DCL terms is formulated under the
metric-based meta-learning paradigm to train MPCL-Net using
limited supervision. On the one hand, owing to the introduction of SSL and FSL ideas, MPCL-Net can be trained in a
meta way. On the other hand, since involving the multiview
scheme and the contrastive learning theory, MPCL-Net can
not only cope with the interclass/intraclass issue but also
distinguish the unseen classes. The encouraging experimental
results on three public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
and generalization for few-shot RSSC tasks.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Zhang and L. Zhang, “Artificial intelligence for remote sensing
data analysis: A review of challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Mag. Replaces Newsletter, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 270–294,
Jun. 2022.
[2] G. Cheng, X. Xie, J. Han, L. Guo, and G. Xia, “Remote sensing
image scene classification meets deep learning: Challenges, methods,
benchmarks, and opportunities,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 13, pp. 3735–3756, 2020.
[3] X. Tang et al., “An unsupervised remote sensing change detection
method based on multiscale graph convolutional network and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5609715.
[4] X. Zhang et al., “SMD-Net: Siamese multi-scale difference-enhancement
network for change detection in remote sensing,” Remote Sens., vol. 14,
no. 7, p. 1580, Mar. 2022.
[5] X. Tang et al., “Meta-hashing for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5615419.
[6] C. Liu, J. Ma, X. Tang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Deep hash
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3420–3443, Apr. 2021.
[7] Y. Yang et al., “AR2 Det: An accurate and real-time rotational one-stage
ship detector in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5605414.
[8] T. Zhang et al., “Foreground refinement network for rotated object
detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5610013.
[9] L. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ye, G. Yin, and B. A. Johnson, “Deep
learning in remote sensing applications: A meta-analysis and review,”
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 152, pp. 166–177, Jun. 2019.
[10] Y. Wang, Q. Yao, J. T. Kwok, and L. M. Ni, “Generalizing from a
few examples: A survey on few-shot learning,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1–34, May 2021.
[11] J. Vanschoren, “Meta-learning,” in Automated Machine Learning. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 35–61.
[12] T. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey, “Meta-learning
in neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 5149–5169, Sep. 2022.

[13] M. Huisman, J. N. van Rijn, and A. Plaat, “A survey of deep metalearning,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 4483–4541, Aug. 2021.
[14] H.-J. Ye and W.-L. Chao, “How to train your MAML to excel in fewshot classification,” 2021, arXiv:2106.16245.
[15] T. Nguyen, T. Luu, T. Pham, S. Rakhimkul, and C. D. Yoo, “Robust
MAML: Prioritization task buffer with adaptive learning process for
model-agnostic meta-learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021, pp. 3460–3464.
[16] S. Qiao, C. Liu, W. Shen, and A. Yuille, “Few-shot image recognition
by predicting parameters from activations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 7229–7238.
[17] S. Gidaris and N. Komodakis, “Dynamic few-shot visual learning
without forgetting,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 4367–4375.
[18] Z. Ji, X. Chai, Y. Yu, Y. Pang, and Z. Zhang, “Improved prototypical
networks for few-shot learning,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 140,
pp. 81–87, Dec. 2020.
[19] T. Gao, X. Han, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Hybrid attention-based prototypical networks for noisy few-shot relation classification,” in Proc. AAAI,
vol. 33, 2019, pp. 6407–6414.
[20] L. Li, J. Han, X. Yao, G. Cheng, and L. Guo, “DLA-MatchNet for fewshot remote sensing image scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 7844–7853, Sep. 2021.
[21] H. Li et al., “RS-MetaNet: Deep metametric learning for few-shot remote
sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59,
no. 8, pp. 6983–6994, Aug. 2021.
[22] G. Cheng et al., “SPNet: Siamese-prototype network for few-shot remote
sensing image scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5608011.
[23] Y. Gu, Y. Wang, and Y. Li, “A survey on deep learning-driven remote
sensing image scene understanding: Scene classification, scene retrieval
and scene-guided object detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 10, p. 2110,
May 2019.
[24] K. Ohri and M. Kumar, “Review on self-supervised image recognition
using deep neural networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 224, Jul. 2021,
Art. no. 107090.
[25] L. Jing and Y. Tian, “Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep
neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 4037–4058, Nov. 2021.
[26] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[27] G. Cheng, C. Yang, X. Yao, L. Guo, and J. Han, “When deep learning
meets metric learning: Remote sensing image scene classification via
learning discriminative CNNs,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2811–2821, May 2018.
[28] X. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Zhao, R. Yao, B. Liu, and Y. Zheng, “Siamese convolutional neural networks for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1200–1204, Aug. 2019.
[29] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun, “Learning a similarity metric
discriminatively, with application to face verification,” in Proc. IEEE
Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2005,
pp. 539–546.
[30] J. Li et al., “Deep discriminative representation learning with attention
map for scene classification,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 9, p. 1366,
Apr. 2020.
[31] X. Tang, Q. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Ma, and L. Jiao, “Attention
consistent network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 2030–2045, 2021.
[32] Y. Liu, Y. Zhong, and Q. Qin, “Scene classification based on multiscale
convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 7109–7121, Dec. 2018.
[33] K. Qi, C. Yang, C. Hu, Y. Shen, S. Shen, and H. Wu, “Rotation
invariance regularization for remote sensing image scene classification
with convolutional neural networks,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 4,
p. 569, Feb. 2021.
[34] X. Lu, W. Ji, X. Li, and X. Zheng, “Bidirectional adaptive feature fusion
for remote sensing scene classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 328,
pp. 135–146, Feb. 2019.
[35] D. G. Lowe, “Object recognition from local scale-invariant features,” in
Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Jun. 1999, pp. 1150–1157.
[36] Q. Bi, H. Zhang, and K. Qin, “Multi-scale stacking attention pooling
for remote sensing scene classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 436,
pp. 147–161, May 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MPCL-Net FOR FEW-SHOT RSSC

[37] F. Sung et al., “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2018, pp. 1199–1208.
[38] K. Gao, B. Liu, X. Yu, J. Qin, P. Zhang, and X. Tan, “Deep relation
network for hyperspectral image few-shot classification,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 6, p. 923, Mar. 2020.
[39] X. Li, J. Deng, and Y. Fang, “Few-shot object detection on remote
sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5601614.
[40] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for fewshot learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017,
pp. 1–11.
[41] Z. Cui, W. Yang, L. Chen, and H. Li, “MKN: Metakernel networks
for few shot remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4705611.
[42] X. Tang, W. Lin, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Class-level
prototype guided multiscale feature learning for remote sensing scene
classification with limited labels,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5622315.
[43] L. Li, X. Yao, G. Cheng, and J. Han, “AIFS-DATASET for few-shot
aerial image scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5618211.
[44] H. Dong, W. Ma, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Self-supervised
representation learning for remote sensing image change detection
based on temporal prediction,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 11, p. 1868,
Jun. 2020.
[45] W. Chen, X. Zheng, and X. Lu, “Hyperspectral image super-resolution
with self-supervised spectral–spatial residual network,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 13, no. 7, p. 1260, Mar. 2021.
[46] X. Li, D. Shi, X. Diao, and H. Xu, “SCL-MLNet: Boosting
few-shot remote sensing scene classification via self-supervised contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5801112.
[47] C. Tao, J. Qi, W. Lu, H. Wang, and H. Li, “Remote sensing image scene
classification with self-supervised paradigm under limited labeled samples,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 8004005.
[48] Z. Zhao, Z. Luo, J. Li, C. Chen, and Y. Piao, “When self-supervised
learning meets scene classification: Remote sensing scene classification
based on a multitask learning framework,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 20,
p. 3276, Oct. 2020.
[49] S. Gidaris, A. Bursuc, N. Komodakis, P. P. Pérez, and M. Cord, “Boosting few-shot visual learning with self-supervision,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8058–8067.
[50] N. Simard and G. Lagrange, “Improving few-shot learning with auxiliary
self-supervised pretext tasks,” 2021, arXiv:2101.09825.
[51] Y. An, H. Xue, X. Zhao, and L. Zhang, “Conditional self-supervised
learning for few-shot classification,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell., Aug. 2021, pp. 2140–2146.
[52] H. Ji, Z. Gao, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, C. Li, and T. Mei, “Few-shot scene
classification of optical remote sensing images leveraging calibrated
pretext tasks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5625513.
[53] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[54] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[55] M. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Lu, T. Xiang, M. Ding, and S. Huang, “IEPT:
Instance-level and episode-level pretext tasks for few-shot learning,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2020, pp. 1–16.
[56] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[57] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 18661–18673.
[58] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[59] Y. Yang and S. Newsam, “Bag-of-visual-words and spatial extensions
for land-use classification,” in Proc. 18th SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv.
Geographic Inf. Syst., Nov. 2010, pp. 270–279.
[60] G. Xia et al., “AID: A benchmark data set for performance evaluation of
aerial scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55,
no. 7, pp. 3965–3981, Jul. 2017.

5614216

[61] G. Cheng, J. Han, and X. Lu, “Remote sensing image scene classification: Benchmark and state of the art,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 10,
pp. 1865–1883, Oct. 2017.
[62] H. Lee, S. J. Hwang, and J. Shin, “Self-supervised label augmentation
via input transformations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
pp. 5714–5724.
[63] O. Vinyals et al., “Matching networks for one shot learning,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1–9.
[64] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[65] F. Wilcoxon, Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 1992.
[66] P. D. Bridge and S. S. Sawilowsky, “Increasing physicians’ awareness of
the impact of statistics on research outcomes: Comparative power of the
T-test and Wilcoxon rank-sum test in small samples applied research,”
J. Clin. Epidemiology, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 229–235, 1999.
[67] Z. Liu, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Performance indicator-based adaptive
model selection for offline data-driven multiobjective evolutionary optimization,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., early access, May 13, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TCYB.2022.3170344.

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include computational
intelligence and image understanding.

Weiquan Lin received the B.E. degree in weapon
systems and engineering from the North University
of China, Taiyuan, China, in 2020. He is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
His research interests include machine learning, few-shot learning, and remote sensing image
processing.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuits
and systems from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a joint Ph.D.
Researcher with the University of Colorado at
Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA, along with Prof.
W. J. Emery. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. His research interests include
remote sensing image content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral
image processing, remote sensing scene classification, and object detection.
For more details, please refer to: https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5614216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From 2015 to 2016, she was a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She is currently
a Professor with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education, Xidian
University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine learning, and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.

Fang Liu (Member, IEEE) was born in China,
in 1990. She received the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Henan University,
Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in
intelligent information processing from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. Her research interests include deep
learning, object detection, polarimetric SAR image
classification, and change detection.

Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xi’an. He has authored or
coauthored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include
signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet
theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is also a member of the IEEE Xi’an Section Executive Committee
and an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:58:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

