IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

5525416

Multiple Information Collaborative Fusion Network
for Joint Classification of Hyperspectral
and LiDAR Data
Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yizhou Zou, Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu , Member, IEEE,
and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Joint classification of hyperspectral image (HSI)
and light detection and ranging (LiDAR) can simultaneously
utilize rich spectral information and elevation information and
has become a hot research topic in remote sensing (RS).
Although many works have been proposed for this task, their
performance cannot reach what we expected due to inadequate
cross-modal feature learning and simple feature fusion. This
article proposes a multiple information collaborative fusion
network (MICF-Net) to overcome those limitations, which aims
to leverage the essentially consistent spatial relationships and
high-level semantic information in multimodal data to guide
the extraction of multimodal fusion features. Specifically, MICFNet first uses a simple two-branch convolutional neural network
(CNN) for preliminary feature extraction. Then, a dual-branch
cross-modal attention fusion transformer (CMAFT) is developed
to mine global contextual content. By fusing the attention maps
of two modalities and limiting their similarity, CMAFT can
retain modality-specific information while achieving information
interaction based on spatial relationships. Next, an adaptive
mask modulation (AMM) module is designed to dynamically
balance the learning rate of each modality to ensure the
effectiveness of the features of all modalities. Finally, to mine the
complementary information of HSI and LiDAR data, a semanticguided feature fusion (SGFF) module is introduced. It achieves
mutual guided learning by exchanging semantic information
between two modalities. Positive experimental results counted
on three popular HSI and LiDAR datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed MICF-Net. Our source codes are
available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/HyperspectralImages-Classification/tree/main/MICF-Net.

Manuscript received 28 April 2024; revised 29 June 2024; accepted 12 July
2024. Date of publication 18 July 2024; date of current version 8 August
2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62171332 and Grant 62276197, in part
by the Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi under Grant
2024GX-YBXM-125, in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Program
of Shaanxi under Grant 2024JC-YBMS-472, and in part by the Shaanxi
Province Innovation Capability Support Plan under Grant 2023-CX-TD-09.
(Corresponding author: Jingjing Ma.)
Xu Tang, Yizhou Zou, Jingjing Ma, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of
the Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com; jjma@ieee.org).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of the Ministry of Education, School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing 210094, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3430373, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3430373

Index Terms— Hyperspectral image (HSI), image classification,
light detection and ranging (LiDAR), multimodal remote
sensing (RS).

I. I NTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, remote sensing (RS) technology has
been developed rapidly, and RS imagery plays an irreplaceable role in various applications, such as disaster detection,
agricultural management, and urban development planning [1],
[2], [3]. With the emergence of various RS data, multimodal
learning has gradually attracted researchers’ attention. The
land covers within RS images can be fully captured by
integrating information from multiple perspectives. However,
massive data from different observation sensors increases the
model’s learning burden, as they contain complementary clues
and redundant and interfering messages. In addition, due to the
diverse imaging conditions, the differences within various RS
data are significant, quickly causing an imbalance problem in
model learning. Therefore, preserving valuable information,
eliminating unnecessary knowledge, and considering the
specific characteristics of different RS data are crucial to RS
multimodal learning [4], [5].
Hyperspectral images (HSIs), as an important product of
RS data, have always garnered increasing attention. Due to
hundreds of continuous spectral bands, HSIs can capture
subtle differences among targets to accurately identify ground
objects [6]. However, it encounters challenges in expressing
differences between objects of the same material and is
susceptible to external factors, such as cloud cover [7].
To overcome these limitations, many other kinds of RS
data have been introduced to the HSI community [8],
including multispectral images (MSIs) [9] and light detection
and ranging (LiDAR) [10]. Among them, LiDAR has
attracted particular attention. This is because it can capture
elevation information for land covers, which aids in accurately
identifying targets with minor spectral discrepancies and
exhibits insensitivity to climatic variations. Considering the
distinct characteristics of the two modalities, the joint
exploration of HSI and LiDAR can provide additional
perspectives for a comprehensive understanding of land
covers, thereby achieving a breakthrough in performance. This
advantage, which a single data source lacks, has propelled the
joint classification task of HSI and LiDAR into a current hot
research topic [11], [12], [13].

I

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

To fully exploit the rich information hidden in HSI
and LiDAR data, many successful methods have been
proposed [14], [15], [16], [17]. The information fusion
technologies incorporated in them can be broadly categorized
into feature fusion and information interaction [18]. For
feature-fusion-based technologies, they can be further divided
into observation-, feature-, and decision-level fusion [19].
Specifically, observation-level fusion methods are often
associated with traditional machine learning methods. It uses
specific mathematical operations to merge the original images
from different modalities [20]. Feature-level fusion models
focus on integrating features obtained from the original images
to form a compact and discriminative representation [21].
Their behavior depends on feature extractors and fusion
strategies. With the continuous advancement of deep models,
such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), the performance of feature-level
fusion models has significantly improved. Decision-level
fusion approaches typically utilize preset or statistical weights
to merge the predictions from different data sources, yielding
the final joint classification results [22]. For information
interaction approaches, they focus on enhancing the discrimination of features for the final classification. To this end,
the complementary messages between different modalities are
always acquired by incorporating clues from another modality
into the feature extraction process of the current modality.
Building on this idea, various strategies, such as weight
sharing, cross-attention, and contrastive learning [23], [24],
[25], [26], have been proposed to exploit the interdependent
knowledge from heterogeneous features corresponding to
different modalities and yield excellent results.
Despite the remarkable results of previous work, some
challenges still deserve further research. First, for HSI
and LiDAR joint classification tasks, information interaction
during the feature extraction process is crucial to enhance
the representation ability of features [27], [28]. However,
existing information interaction methods often deal with
features directly, which may weaken the specific information
of each modality. Second, the feature learning rates for
different modalities are always imbalanced due to the data
differences. This leads to insufficient feature extraction in
weaker modalities, which harms the representation ability of
final features [29], [30]. Last but not least, simple feature
fusion strategies struggle to fully exploit the correlation and
complementary information of heterogeneous features from
different modalities, limiting the model’s performance [31],
[32], [33].
To address the challenges above, we propose a multiple
information collaborative fusion network (MICF-Net) for the
joint classification of HSI and LiDAR data in this article. First,
a simple two-branch CNN performs initial feature extraction
and dimension unification on HSI and LiDAR data. Then,
two dual-branch cross-modal attention fusion transformers
(CMAFTs) are employed to mine the global interpixel relationships further and ensure the information interaction across
the different modalities. Unlike simple interactions directly
on features, CMAFTs complete communication by mining
potential spatial similarities between modalities from attention

maps. This way, the unique characteristics of modalities can be
maintained, which is suitable for cross-modal learning. Next,
an adaptive mask modulation (AMM) module is designed
to identify and suppress the dominant modality, effectively
mitigating the learning imbalance between different source
data. Finally, instead of conventional linear fusion techniques,
a semantic-guided feature fusion (SGFF) module is introduced
to fully explore the correlation and complementary clues
between different features by exchanging pseudo-predictions
between modalities. Through the collaborative operation of the
above modules, valuable multimodal semantic features can be
obtained and utilized to achieve accurate classification.
The main contributions of this article are summarized as
follows.
1) We propose an end-to-end multimodal fusion network
named MICF-Net in this article to achieve the precise
joint classification of HSI and LiDAR data. By fully
extracting the intrinsic characteristics of each modality
and the potential correlation between modalities, highquality discriminative features can be obtained and
utilized for final classification.
2) A dual-branch CMAFT is proposed to mine global contextual clues while performing information interaction
based on spatial relationships. It not only integrates
attentional information from both modalities but also
facilitates the interaction of modalities by limiting the
correlation of spatial associations. Therefore, efficient
interaction is achieved while retaining modality specificity, enhancing feature representation.
3) An AMM module is developed to dynamically adjust
the optimization rate for each modality’s feature
extraction process for mitigating the issue of imbalanced
multimodal learning. In this way, the under-optimization
of the weaker modality is effectively alleviated, which
is beneficial to subsequent feature fusion.
4) An SGFF module is developed to merge feature
representations of different modalities. Unlike simple
linear fusion strategies, it leverages the semantics of
one modality to guide features in another. Thus, the
complementary information of the two modalities can
be explored, generating highly discriminative semantic
features and improving the model’s performance.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related studies based on feature fusion and
information interaction. In Section III, we describe our MICFNet in detail. Section IV analyzes the experimental results
counted on three public datasets. Finally, a short conclusion
is presented in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we review some previous HSI and LiDAR
joint classification methods from two aspects, i.e., feature
fusion-based and information interaction-based methods.
A. Feature Fusion-Based Joint Classification Methods
For the joint classification of HSI and LiDAR data, feature
fusion between modalities is an essential technology, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

numerous related studies have been proposed [34], [35], [36].
Considering the heterogeneity of the two modalities, a spatial–
spectral saliency enhancement network was proposed in [37].
The authors first fuse LiDAR images with HSIs through the
Gram–Schmidt method [20]. Then, a cross-layer interaction
module and a center spectrum correction module are developed
to enhance the feature representation of each modality.
Finally, a decision-level fusion scheme effectively integrates
multimodal features and achieves accurate classification.
To further explore the correlation between fused features
and single-modal features, Song et al. [38] proposed a
hashing-based deep metric learning method. On the one hand,
an attention-based feature fusion module is developed to
generate high discriminative features. On the other hand,
hashing-based metric loss is further used to constrain the
similarity of single-modal and fused features to mine adequate
information in multimodal data. Integrating them together
will yield favorable classification results. Feng et al. [39]
introduced a dynamic scale hierarchical fusion network for the
joint classification of HSI and LiDAR data. It dynamically
selects suitable scale features by evaluating similarity in
scale space and employs spatial and modal attention modules
for hierarchical fusion to achieve comprehensive feature
complementarity. The positive classification maps reported in
the literature illustrate their effectiveness.
With the appearance of vision transformer (ViT) [40], many
transformer-based models have been presented for HSI and
LiDAR joint classification. For example, Zhang et al. [41]
developed a multimodal transformer network to extract
specific and shared features from HSI and LiDAR data. The
local spectral, global spatial, and elevation information can be
obtained by introducing the self-attention mechanism. Along
with a new transformer encoder, the shared spatial features
between the two modalities can be fully explored for reliable
classification results. An extended ViT (ExViT) network
was proposed in [42]. It integrates separable convolution
modules and self-attention mechanisms to learn the spatial
and channel information in a lightweight manner. Furthermore,
by incorporating early-, mid-, and late-fusion techniques,
ExViT enhances information interaction between cross-modal
tokens, consequently improving the model’s performance in
terms of quantitative accuracy.
B. Information Interaction-Based Joint Classification
Methods
Information interaction is another crucial technology for the
joint classification of HSI and LiDAR data, which enhances
the richness of feature representations and the discriminability
of classifiers. Typical techniques include image reconstruction,
contrastive learning, etc. As for the technique of reconstruction, it plays an important role in preserving the integrity of
the information, and many methods adopt this strategy. For
instance, Zhang et al. [43] proposed an interleaving perception
CNN network. It consists of a bidirectional autoencoder and a
two-branch CNN, which aim to reconstruct HSI and LiDAR
images and produce the final classification maps. Moreover,
two multimodal structural constraints are designed to ensure

5525416

the completeness of the fused features. Similarly, Wu et al.
[44] developed a cross-channel reconstruction network for
HSI and LiDAR joint classification. Unlike typical direct
reconstruction strategies, this model learns a more compact
fusion representation by reconstructing flipped features, which
benefits downstream classification. A coupled adversarial
learning-based classification (CALC) method was introduced
in [45] under the reconstructed framework. First, a game
construction is used for dual generators and discriminators
to learn modality-specific discriminative features. Second,
a linear fusion scheme and a parameter-sharing strategy
are used in the dual generator to mine the similar highorder semantics between HSIs and LiDAR effectively. Finally,
a multilevel fusion network and adaptive prediction fusion
method are introduced to generate accurate classification maps.
Contrastive learning plays an irreplaceable role in multimodal information interaction by mining the consistency of
structures between modalities. Specifically, Hang et al. [46]
proposed an unsupervised feature learning framework based
on contrastive learning. Initially, contrastive learning is
employed to investigate the intrinsic structural similarities
between HSIs and LiDAR data. Then, a small set of
training samples are utilized for fine-tuning. Based on
them, satisfactory classification results can be obtained.
Furthermore, Feng et al. [47] proposed a novel self-supervised
contrastive learning framework. Using intramodel and crossmodal contrastive learning, multimodal feature representations
can be achieved in the pretraining stage. Then, in the
fine-tuning stage, a hybrid cross-modal fusion module is
designed to integrate multimodal complementary information
compactly, ensuring satisfactory classification performance.
Other strategies such as weight sharing and cross-attention
also achieve efficient information interaction. Hang et al. [48]
employed two coupled CNNs to extract features from HSI
and LiDAR data separately. Through a specific parametersharing mechanism, the interaction of multimodal data
is effectively enhanced. The reported results counted on
two multimodal datasets confirm its effectiveness. Another
attention-based interaction was introduced in [49]. It first
integrates attention information from different modalities,
exploiting complementary advantages among their features.
Then, a hierarchical feature fusion framework combines
modality-specific features with comprehensive features for
precise classification.
III. M ETHOD
A. Overview
To explore more beneficial knowledge and improve the
feasibility of joint classification of HSI and LiDAR data,
we propose a novel network named MICF-Net. Its overall
framework is shown in Fig. 1(a).
First, the corresponding patches Xh ∈ Rs×s×c1 and
Xl ∈ Rs×s×c2 extracted from an HSI and LiDAR data are
fed into a simple two-branch CNN network, where s × s
represents the patch size, and c1 and c2 are the original
channel numbers of HSI and LiDAR. For the HSI branch,
a 3-D convolution with the kernel size of 5 × 1 × 1

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Framework of the proposed MICF-Net. (a) Overall framework. (b) CMAFT. (c) SGFF module (taking the HSI branch as an example).

and a 2-D convolution with the kernel size of 1 × 1 are
stacked sequentially to extract spectral information from HSI.
Differently, since LiDAR is a single-channel image, two
1 × 1 2-D convolutions are stacked to extract elevation
information from LiDAR. Here, the number of filters of the
two convolutional layers in the HSI branch are 8 and 64,
respectively, while in the LiDAR branch, they are 32 and
64. Furthermore, to speed up the convergence of the model,
a batch normalization (BN) and a leaky rectified linear unit
(LeakyReLU) function are applied sequentially after each
convolutional layer. After this step, the patches from the two
modalities are mapped into Fh ∈ Rs×s×c and Fl ∈ Rs×s×c ,
where c = 64.
Second, two dual-branch CMAFTs are employed to gather
global contextual content from the obtained Fh and Fl , while
further enhancing the interaction between modalities via the
fusion of attention and the constraints of potential similarities.
Following this, AMM is applied to identify the learning
rates of two modalities based on classification accuracy and
adaptively adjusts them to alleviate the unbalanced learning.
This way, the effectiveness of each branch’s information can
be ensured. Subsequently, SGFF will be used to mine the
complementary information between different modalities fully.
Through mutually exchanging semantics between HSI and
LiDAR, the two branches’ valuable clues can be explored
for a comprehensive integration. Finally, the discriminative
fusion features are mapped into semantic vectors through a
fully connected layer to achieve pixel-level classification. Now,
we will explain the CMAFT, AMM, and SGFF modules in
detail.
B. Cross-Modal Attention Fusion (CMAF) Transformer
Although HSI and LiDAR record target information from
different perspectives, they essentially describe the same

Fig. 2. Schematic of the proposed CMAF structure (taking the HSI branch
as an example).

area. Therefore, they should be similar in transformation
spaces [46]. Inspired by this observation, we propose a dualbranch CMAFT to extract global contextual knowledge and
simultaneously mine the similarities in the spatial relationship
between the two modalities. Specifically, features Fh and
Fl are first flattened and spliced with an all-zero learnable
classification token to generate sequence features F′h ∈ R N ×c
and Fl′ ∈ R N ×c , where N = s 2 + 1. Then, learnable position
embeddings are added to F′h and Fl′ to produce the input
features Z0h ∈ R N ×c and Zl0 ∈ R N ×c . Next, Z0h and Zl0 are input
into D dual-branch CMAFTs orderly to mine global contextual
knowledge while enhancing the interaction between the two
modalities. In this article, we set D = 2. Since all CMAFTs
share the same structure, we take the CMAFT of the first HSI
branch as an example to explain for clarity.
Like the standard ViT encoder, CMAFT is divided into two
components. The former is responsible for mining the global
context of the input, and the latter focuses on further nonlinear
transformation. Unlike the standard ViT encoder, CMAFT
expands the original self-attention into cross-modal fused
attention, effectively enhancing the information interaction
between modalities. Its structure is displayed in Fig. 1(b), and

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

its process can be expressed as
 
0
Ẑ h = CMAF LN Z0h , Al + Z0h
  0 
0
Z1h = MLP LN Ẑ h
+ Ẑ h

(1)

where CMAF(·), LN(·), and MLP(·) represent the CMAF,
layer normalization (LN), and multilayer perceptron (MLP)
functions, and Al ∈ Rn h ×N ×N denotes the self-attention map
obtained from the first LiDAR branch. Here, n h means the
number of attention heads. The detailed acquisition process of
Al will be explained later.
As a key part of CMAFT, CMAF focuses on discovering
the potential similarities and complementarities between
modalities. To this end, apart from the self-attention within
the modality, CMAF also fuses the attention maps of different
modalities to utilize the complementary information of the
two modalities effectively. Considering that the concatenation
operation can better preserve modality-specific information
than the addition operation, we choose to concatenate the
self-attention maps of the two branches and then input them
into the Project block containing only 1 × 1 convolutions to
mine the complex correlation of spatial descriptions between
different modalities. Its specific structure in the ith head space
is shown in Fig. 2, and the complete CMAF can be formulated
as
  

CMAF LN Z0h , Al = H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn h W

Hi = Softmax CAih Vi


CAih = Aih + Project Aih , Ali
Qi KT
Aih = √ i
c/n h


i
Qh = LN Z0h Wiq , Kih = LN Z0h Wik

(2)
Vih = LN Z0h Wiv
where Hi is the output of the ith head, CAih means the
cross-modal attention of the ith head, Aih and Ali implies
the self-attention of the ith head of the current HSI and
LiDAR branches, Qi , Ki , and Vi are the ith key, query,
and value of LN(Z0h ), W ∈ Rc×c , Wiq ∈ Rc×c/n h , Wik ∈
Rc×c/n h , and Wiv ∈ Rc×c/n h indicate learnable parameter
matrices, and [·], Softmax(·), and Project(·) denote the
concatenation, softmax, and mapping operation functions,
respectively. By concatenating the self-attention Aih of all head
spaces, we can get Ah ∈ Rn h ×N ×N . The acquisition process
of Al [mentioned in (1)] is consistent with Ah . The Project
block consists of two 1 × 1 2-D convolutions with the kernel
numbers of m and n. Also, the BN and LeakyReLU layers
are added between them. In this article, we set m = 8 and
n = 1, where m is a free parameter and n will be fixed
for the residual connection. Note that to further enhance the
interaction between modalities, Project blocks in the dualbranch CMAFT share parameters.
In addition, considering the HSI and LiDAR data cover
the same location, their attention maps should be similar.
To formulate this point, we first obtain the cross-modal
attention maps CAh_d and CAl_d of the dth CMAFT corresponding to the HSI and LiDAR branches by concatenating the

5525416

cross-modal attention maps collected from each head space.
Then, Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence [50] is introduced to
constrain the correlation between two cross-modal attention
maps. In sum, the correlation loss of D two-branch CMAFTs
can be expressed as
LCOR =

D
X


KL CAh_d , CAl_d .

(3)

d=1

In general, after passing D dual-branch CMAFTs, not only can
the global context of HSI and LiDAR data be exploited, but the
complementary information of the two modalities can also be
deeply mined. This is beneficial for extracting comprehensive
features.
C. AMM Module
For joint classification tasks of multimodal data, learning
imbalance between modalities is a common challenge due to
the heterogeneity of modalities [30]. This imbalance arises
for two main reasons. First, the convergence speeds of
different modalities are inherently inconsistent. Second, betterperforming modalities usually produce smaller losses, which
hinders the learning of other modalities [51]. To alleviate this
problem, we develop AMM in this section, which aims to
adaptively select and suppress the dominant modality, thereby
ensuring comprehensive feature learning for all modalities.
The first step of AMM is to identify the dominant modality.
Inspired by Fan et al. [52], we employ two nonparametric
prototype classifiers to generate pseudo predictions for HSI
and LiDAR and calculate the modal imbalance rate. In detail,
1×c
we first pick out the classification tokens tcls
and
h ∈ R
cls
1×c
D
D
tl ∈ R
from features Zh and Zl obtained by D CMAFTs.
Then, the category distribution probability can be obtained
for each modality by calculating the distance between its
classification token and the corresponding prototype. This
process can be expressed as

k

exp −d tcls
h , Mh
cls
eh k|th = P K
p
 , k = 1, 2, . . . , K
k
cls
l=1 exp −d th , Mh


exp −d tlcls , Mlk
el k|tlcls = P K
p
 , k = 1, 2, . . . , K (4)
k
cls
l=1 exp −d tl , Ml
where p̃h and p̃l represent the pseudo prediction probability
distributions of HSI and LiDAR, respectively, K denotes the
number of categories, d(·, ·) implies the Euclidean distance,
and Mkh and Mlk are the prototypes of the kth category of
HSI and LiDAR data. Next, the imbalance rate of the two
modalities can be measured based on the confidence ratio of
accurate predictions corresponding to each modality in each
batch, which can be defined as
r=

B
X

B
 X

p̃ h yi |tcls
/
p̃l yi |tlcls
h

i=1

i=1

(5)

where B indicates batch size and yi represents the ground truth
of the ith sample.
When we get the imbalance rate, we can further use it to
adjust the learning speeds of different modalities by a feature
mask modulation operation. It first converts r into the mask

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

probabilities β and γ of HSI and LiDAR features in line with
the following formulas:
(
β = 1 − tanh(α · r ), γ = 1, r ≥ 1
(6)
β = 1, γ = 1 − tanh(α · r ), r < 1
where tanh(·) means the hyperbolic tangent function and α is
the penalty coefficient. Then, the modulation with probabilities
β and γ will be conducted on ZhD and ZlD , i.e.,


Zh = maskh · ZhD , maskh = δh1 , δh2 , . . . δhc


Zl = maskl · ZlD , maskl = δl1 , δl2 , . . . δlc
(7)
where δhi ∈ {β, 1} and δli ∈ {γ , 1} represent Bernoulli random
variables with probabilities β and γ . Here, we choose the
Bernoulli distribution due to its binary characteristics and
high computational efficiency. Therefore, it is simpler and
more suitable for our task than other probability distributions.
According to (6) and (7), we can find that when the learning
rates of two modalities are imbalanced, the mask probability of
the dominant modality will be smaller. This implies that more
channels of the dominant modality will be suppressed. In this
way, our AMM can effectively align the learning states of
different modalities, facilitating the comprehensive extraction
of multimodal features. Note that we update the prototypes in
a momentum manner between each batch following [52], [53],
which can be expressed as:
k

Mkh = εMkh + (1 − ε)M̄h
k
Mlk = εMlk + (1 − ε)M̄l
k

p̃l from the LiDAR branch into a fully connected layer to
generate the query vector Q. Then, Q is multiplied by K
and entered into the softmax function to obtain the aggregate
weight S ∈ R1×N . After that, S is multiplied by V to obtain
a LiDAR-assistant HSI-modal representation. In addition, the
1×c
classification token tcls
of Zh is residually connected
h ∈ R
1×c
to it to obtain gh ∈ R , which further highlights the
characteristics of HSI further. Overall, this process can be
formulated as


QKT
√
gh = S · V + tcls
,
S
=
Softmax
h
c
Q = p̃l Wq , K = Zh Wk , V = Zh Wv
(9)
where Wq ∈ R K ×c , Wk ∈ Rc×c , and Wv ∈ Rc×c indicate
learnable parameter matrices. Similarly, the HSI-assistant
LiDAR-modal feature gl ∈ R1×c can be obtained by inputting
the pseudo-prediction probability of the HSI branch into the
LiDAR branch. Finally, the multimodal feature g ∈ R1×2c
can be obtained by concatenating them, i.e., g = [gh , gl ].
Subsequently, the fused feature g is input into the fully
connected layer to obtain the final classification results.
E. Training Loss
In this article, we utilize cross-entropy loss [54] as the
classification loss, whose definition is
LCE =

k

D. SGFF Module
After obtaining the features zh and zl corresponding HSI and
LiDAR, the next step for the final classification is to fuse them
for the multimodal features. To enhance the discrimination
of the multimodal features, we introduce the SGFF module
in this section. Unlike simple integration, SGFF encourages
each modality to leverage the semantic information from other
modalities to extract multimodal complementary messages
effectively so that the fused multimodal features can be
enhanced. Here, the semantic information refers to the pseudoprediction results of the two modalities obtained in AMM,
representing the possible category distributions of the same
scene from two different modalities. For clarity, we take the
HSI branch as an example to illustrate SGFF, whose structure
is depicted in Fig. 1(c).
To explore as many beneficial clues as possible for
classification from HSI and LiDAR data, SGFF also takes
the pseudo-prediction distribution probabilities of the two
modalities obtained by AMM into account during the feature
fusion. In particular, SGFF first passes the unique features
zh corresponding to the HSI branch through two fully
connected layers to derive the key and value vectors K and V.
Simultaneously, SGFF inputs the pseudo prediction probability

yi log( pi )

(10)

i=1

(8)

where M̄h and M̄l indicate the average of the corresponding
features of the kth class samples calculated in the current
batch, and ε is the momentum parameter that is fixed as 0.9 in
this article.

B
X

where pi indicates the probability of correct prediction. Considering the correlation loss LCOR mentioned in Section III-B,
the overall loss can be expressed as
L = LCE + λLCOR

(11)

where λ is the balance coefficient, which controls the
importance of the classification loss and correlation loss.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
MICF-Net on three publicly available datasets containing both
HSI and LiDAR data. We assess the model’s performance
using three assessment criteria [22]: overall accuracy (OA),
average accuracy (AA), and Kappa coefficient (Kappa). Note
that all experiments are conducted five times, and the average
and standard deviation of the results are reported.
A. Datasets Description
1) Houston Dataset [55]: The first dataset was collected
on the University of Houston campus and neighboring
urban areas in June 2012. It comprises two data sources,
each of which encloses 349 × 1905 pixels. The HSI data
includes 144 reflection bands covering a wavelength range
of 380–1050 nm, while the LiDAR data has only one
channel. There are 15 029 labeled pixels with 15 land covers.
Following [45], 20 labeled pixels from each category are
selected as training data, and the rest are used as test data.
Fig. 3 illustrates a pseudo-color HSI, a gray-scale image of
LiDAR, and the ground truth map.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

5525416

Fig. 4. Visualization of the MUUFL dataset. (a) Pseudo-color image of HSI.
(b) Gray-scale image of LiDAR. (c) Ground truth map. The below legends
indicate the categories by different colors.

Fig. 3. Visualization of the Houston dataset. (a) Pseudo-color image of HSI.
(b) Gray-scale image of LiDAR. (c) Ground truth map. The below legends
indicate the categories by different colors.

2) MUUFL Dataset [56]: The second dataset was collected
in November 2010 at The University of Southern Mississippi
Gulfport Campus, Long Beach, MS, USA. It comprises
two data sources: HSI and LiDAR data. HSI consists of
325 × 220 pixels with 64 bands ranging from 0.38 to 1.05 µm.
The LiDAR data were acquired using the Gemini Airborne
Laser Terrain Mapper (ALTM) LiDAR sensor. The number of
labeled pixels in this dataset is 53 687, which are grouped into
11 classes manually. In the following experiment, we select
20 samples from each class to construct the training set, and
the remaining samples are treated as the testing set [45]. Fig. 4
visually shows the MUUFL dataset with its 11 distinguishable
class labels.
3) Trento Dataset [27]: The last dataset was captured
in a rural area south of Trento, Italy, and it consists of
HSI and LiDAR data. Their sizes are 600 × 166, and HSI
involves 63 bands ranging from 0.40 to 0.98 µm. There are
six annotated land covers covering 30 124 pixels. Similarly,
20 labeled pixels from each category are randomly selected
for training, and the others are allocated for testing [45]. Fig. 5
visualizes two data in this dataset.
B. Experiment Settings
In this article, all experiments are conducted on a workstation equipped with a GeForce RTX 2080 Ti with 11 GB
of memory. The PyTorch [57] deep learning framework is
utilized for implementing the proposed method. All parameters
of MICF-Net were randomly initialized without any pretrained
parameters. The Adam optimizer was selected to optimize the
parameters of MICF-Net. The training epoch and batch size
are set to 120 and 64, respectively. The learning rates are set to
2e−4, 1e−3, and 4e−4 for the Houston, MUUFL, and Trento
datasets. Some free parameters within MICF-Net should be set
in advance, including the patch size s × s, number of attention
heads n h , number of dual-branch CMAFT D, middle layer
size m of Project, balance coefficient λ in the overall loss,

Fig. 5. Visualization of the Trento dataset. (a) Pseudo-color image of HSI.
(b) Gray-scale image of LiDAR. (c) Ground truth map. The below legends
indicate the categories by different colors.

TABLE I
VALUES OF F REE PARAMETERS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

penalty coefficient α in AMM, and the momentum parameter
ε in AMM. Their empirically optimal values are listed in
Table I, and their impacts on MICF-Net will be presented in
Section IV-E.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE II
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE H OUSTON DATASET (%)

C. Classification Performance
To demonstrate the effectiveness of MICF-Net, we select
eight advanced HSI and LiDAR joint classification methods,
including dual attention-based multimodal fusion network
(FusAtNet) [27], adaptive mutual-learning-based multimodal
data fusion network (AM3Net) [58], global–local transformer
network (GLT-Net) [59], CALC [45], hierarchical CNN and
transformer (HCT) [60], multimodal fusion transformer (MFT)
[61], ExViT [42], and mixing self-attention and convolution
network (MACN) [62]. All methods are accomplished using
the codes released by the authors. Their free parameters are
set according to the original literature, and their experimental
settings are consistent with the contents mentioned in
Section IV-B.
1) Results on Houston Dataset: The numerical results
of different methods counted on the Houston dataset are
summarized in Table II. For clarity, the best values are in bold.
It is easy to find that MICF-Net achieves the best performance.
For example, compared with the best-performing baseline
model (i.e., MACN), our model improves OA/AA/Kappa
by 0.25%/0.08%/0.17%, respectively. Moreover, MICF-Net
exhibits the smallest standard deviations among all methods,
i.e., only 0.17%/0.23%/0.19% on OA/AA/Kappa. In terms of
accuracy of each category, MICF-Net also achieved the highest
accuracy in most cases, even reaching 100% accuracy in the
“Tennis Court” and “Running Track” categories. Performance
in other categories is also satisfactory. The reasons behind
these positive results are threefold. First, MICF-Net focuses
on information interaction while retaining modal-specificity
by mining the similarity of spatial relationships between
modalities, which improves the discrimination of the crossmodal features. Second, the AMM module effectively
balances the learning rates between different modalities, which
ensures that valuable clues can be fully explored from HSI
and LiDAR data simultaneously. Last, the SGFF module
exchanges semantic information of different modalities, further
promoting feature fusion. However, we cannot ignore that
the behavior of MICF-Net is not strongest in some classes,
such as “Stressed grass” and “Synthetic grass.” The main
reason is that the objects in these categories exhibit variable
geometric shapes and sizes, requiring hierarchical feature

extraction to capture these details and variations effectively.
However, MICF-Net mainly adopts the transformer structure,
which treats all pixels equally without distinguishing the
geometric complexity of different objects. This manner
may lead to a slight decrease in the generalization ability
of MICF-Net in these specific categories. Fortunately, the
performance gaps between MICF-Net and better methods
in these classes are small, and strengthening the proposed
model for these unacceptable classes is our further work.
The above discussion illustrates the effectiveness of our
MICF-Net.
The visualization result of MICF-Net is shown in Fig. 6.
Also, the classification maps produced by the other compared
methods are exhibited for reference. Given the large size
of Houston, we have enlarged the area outlined by the red
box in the classification diagram for ease of observation and
analysis. It is evident that the map generated by MICF-Net is
closest to the ground truth. Specifically, within the displayed
area, MICF-Net achieves the best recognition results among
all methods for the “Road” and “Healthy grass” categories,
while other algorithms tend to produce more misclassification
results. These observations further illustrate the MICF-Net’s
usefulness.
2) Results on MUUFL Dataset: The classification performance of different methods counted on the MUUFL dataset
is exhibited in Table III. Also, the best value in each
row is in bold for clarity. Like the Houston dataset, the
proposed MICF-Net performs optimally in three indicators.
Compared with various comparisons, our improvements in
OA are 9.40% (over FusAtNet), 14.63% (over AM3Net),
1.82% (over GLT), 4.18% (over CALC), 4.91% (over HCT),
5.79% (over MFT), 5.50% (over ExViT), and 4.69% (over
MACN). Regarding the accuracy of each category, MICF-Net
outperforms others in five out of 11 categories. While GLT
shows similar performance, achieving the best accuracy in five
categories, MICF-Net maintains a more significant advantage
when considering the three overall indicators. In addition,
a notable finding is that in “Yellow cur” and “Mixed ground
surface,” the improvement of MICF-Net is significant. This can
be attributed to its comprehensive mining of complementary
information in multimodal data, clearly distinguishing between
categories.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

5525416

Fig. 6. Classification maps of labeled samples of the Houston dataset obtained by various methods. Each column exhibits the maps obtained by a fixed
method. (a) Ground truth, (b) FusAtNet [27], (c) AM3Net [58], (d) GLT [59], (e) CALC [45], (f) HCT [60], (g) MFT [61], (h) ExViT [42], (i) MACN [62],
and (j) MICF-Net (Our).
TABLE III
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE MUUFL DATASET (%)

Pixel-level classification maps of different methods are
depicted in Fig. 7. By observation, we find that some
noise is present in all classification maps. However, MICFNet produces results with more apparent edges and less
noise, which are closest to the ground truth compared
to other models. This superior performance is attributed
to MICF-Net’s comprehensive exploration of multimodal
complementary information, thereby obtaining more accurate
feature representation.
3) Results on Trento Dataset: Table IV summarizes the
results of nine HSI and LiDAR joint classification methods
counted on the Trento dataset. Not surprisingly, MICF-Net
surpasses all compared methods in three metrics. Moreover,
the accuracy of MICF-Net reaches the optimal value in four
out of six categories. Taking Kappa as an example, our method
achieves improvements of 1.19% (over FusAtNet), 5.30%
(over AM3Net), 0.21% (over GLT), 0.10% (over CALC),
0.22% (over HCT), 1.57% (over MFT), 0.43% (over ExViT),
and 0.60% (over MACN), respectively. This illustrates the
effectiveness of MICF-Net. In addition, the near-minimum

standard deviation (only 0.09% on OA) further illustrates its
stability.
Fig. 8 presents the classification maps of various methods.
Although the quality of the classification maps of all
methods is acceptable, the result obtained by the proposed
MICF-Net still outperforms others. For example, in the
classification results of the “Road” class, MICF-Net predicts
fewer misclassified pixels and smoother boundaries than
others. Overall, the prediction map of MICF-Net is closest
to the ground truth, further confirming its effectiveness and
competitiveness.
D. Ablation Analysis
1) Importance of CMAFT Module: This section aims to
ablate the CMAFT module to evaluate its effectiveness.
It comprises two main components: CMAF and the correlation
loss LCOR . CMAFT’s contributions can be evaluated by
systematically removing each component. Therefore, based on
CMAFT, we construct four variants of MICF-Net, including
proposed (w/o CMAFT1 ), proposed (w/o CMAFT2 ), proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 7. Classification maps of labeled samples of the MUUFL dataset obtained by various methods. Each column exhibits the maps obtained by a fixed
method. (a) Ground truth, (b) FusAtNet [27], (c) AM3Net [58], (d) GLT [59], (e) CALC [45], (f) HCT [60], (g) MFT [61], (h) ExViT [42], (i) MACN [62],
and (j) MICF-Net (Our).
TABLE IV
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE T RENTO DATASET (%)

Fig. 8. Classification maps of labeled samples of the Trento dataset obtained by various methods. Each column exhibits the maps obtained by a fixed method.
(a) Ground truth, (b) FusAtNet [27], (c) AM3Net [58], (d) GLT [59], (e) CALC [45], (f) HCT [60], (g) MFT [61], (h) ExViT [42], (i) MACN [62], and
(j) MICF-Net (Our).

(w/o CMAFT3 ), and proposed (w/o CMAFT4 ). The first
one indicates that the CMAFT module is eliminated from
MICF-Net. The second one represents that MICF-Net involves
CMAF but without the correlation loss. The third one implies
that CMAF is replaced with standard self-attention. The
last one means the concatenation operation in CMAF is
replaced with the addition operation. Table V presents their
results, and the original MICF-Net’s performance is also
exhibited for reference. Compared to the original MICF-Net,

the performance of the four variants has decreased to varying
degrees. For instance, the OA values of proposed (w/o
CMAFT1 ) are dropped by 0.47%, 2.97%, and 0.19% on the
three datasets. This illustrates the effectiveness of the proposed
CMAFT. Moreover, in most cases, the second and third
variants outperform the first one, indicating the importance
of information interaction in the feature extraction process.
In addition, MICF-Net outperforms proposed (w/o CMAFT4 )
in all cases, indicating that concatenation operation is more

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

5525416

TABLE V
R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDIES OF VARIOUS PARTS OF O UR MICF-N ET ON T HREE DATASETS . P ROPOSED
( W / O ∗) R EPRESENTS MICF-N ET W ITHOUT ∗ M ODULE (%)

suitable for our tasks. This can be attributed to the addition
operation potentially confusing information from different
modalities. In contrast, the concatenation operation preserves
the characteristics of each modality, which is conducive to the
subsequent mining of modal correlation.
2) Effectiveness of AMM Module: The AMM module is
designed to alleviate the imbalance problem in multimodal
learning. We remove it from MICF-Net to study its function
and record the new network proposed (w/o AMM). Its
performance counted on three datasets is summarized in
Table V. By observing the results, we can find the various
indicators’ values of proposed (w/o AMM) are lower than
those of MICF-Net. For example, compared to proposed
(w/o AMM) on Houston, MICF-Net obtains enhancements
of 0.12%/0.11%/0.12% in OA/AA/Kappa, respectively. For
another example, on MUUFL, the improvements achieved by
MICF-Net in OA/AA/Kappa are 0.52%/0.34%/0.64%. These
investigations illustrate that adjusting the learning rate of
different modalities is crucial to the joint classification task
of HSI and LiDAR data, thereby confirming the effectiveness
of AMM.
3) Significance of SGFF Module: For joint classification
tasks of HSI and LiDAR data, simple linear fusion fails
to fully exploit the potential complementary relationships
between heterogeneous features. To address this, we developed
the SGFF module, which aims to intuitively explore complementary relationships between modalities using high-level
semantic information from other modalities. To demonstrate
its performance, we conduct three sets of experiments. Specifically, first, we remove the SGFF module and concatenate the
multimodal features (i.e., the classification tokens) to complete
the classification directly. This model is named proposed
(w/o SGFF1 ). Second, after eliminating SGFF, the two modal
features are summed up for subsequent classification. This
model is recorded as proposed (w/o SGFF2 ). Third, to prove
the pseudo prediction’s effectiveness, we directly replace it
with another branch’s classification token and fuse them
through the SGFF module. This model is denoted as proposed
(w/o SGFF3 ).
Table V shows three models’ classification results counted
on three datasets. As observed from the table, the behavior
of the three models is weaker than that of MICF-Net
in all cases. Taking the Houston dataset as an example,
MICF-Net surpasses proposed (w/o SGFF1 ) and proposed

(w/o SGFF2 ) by 0.42%/0.25%/0.45% and 0.98%/0.78%/1.06%
in OA/AA/Kappa. This is because SGFF can utilize the semantic clues from different modalities to exploit complementary
information, thereby improving the representation ability of
fusion features. Compared with proposed (w/o SGFF3 ), MICFNet improves by 0.66%/0.66%/0.70% in OA/AA/Kappa. This
is because information covered by classification tokens differs
in distribution, hindering mutual guidance. The pseudoprediction results can mitigate these negative impacts by
mapping the uneven clues into the same semantic space.
Overall, the above findings underscore the importance of
mining the complementary relationships between modalities,
highlighting the effectiveness of SGFF.
E. Parameter Analysis
As mentioned in Section IV-B, there are several free
parameters in MICF-Net. This section investigates their
influence by tuning their values. Note that we only change
one parameter each time, and others are fixed according to
Table I.
1) Patch Size s × s: To examine its influence on the joint
classification of HSI and LiDAR, we vary its values within
the range of [7 × 7, 13 × 13]. The OA curves of different
MICF-Nets with various patch sizes counted on the three
datasets are illustrated in Figs. 9(a), 10(a), and 11(a). For
Houston, the OA values of MICF-Nets rise first and then
decline, and the peak value appears at 9 × 9. For the other two
datasets, the behavior of MICF-Nets becomes weaker when the
patch size increases. These observations can be attributed to
Houston’s lower spatial resolution and more complex contents
than the other two datasets, thus requiring a larger patch size
to gather more information. The results suggest the patch size
can be set around 7 × 7.
2) Number of Attention Heads n h : Like standard ViT,
we apply the multihead mechanism to CMAF, and the head
number equals n h . Here, the values n h are changed from 2 to
16 with an interval of 2 to study its impacts. The results of
MICF-Nets with different n h counted on the three datasets
are shown in Figs. 9(b), 10(b), and 11(b). When it increases
from 2 to 4, the performance of MICF-Nets almost remains.
When n h is bigger than 4, MICF-Nets get stronger. The peak
values of MICF-Nets for Houston, MUUFL, and Trento appear
at n h = 8 and n h = 16, respectively. It is noted that when

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 9. Influence of different free parameters on our MICF-Net. The OA curves are counted on the Houston dataset. (a) s × s. (b) n h . (c) D. (d) m. (e) λ.
(f) α. (g) ε.

Fig. 10. Influence of different free parameters on our MICF-Net. The OA curves are counted on the MUUFL dataset. (a) s × s. (b) n h . (c) D. (d) m. (e) λ.
(f) α. (g) ε.

Fig. 11. Influence of different free parameters on our MICF-Net. The OA curves are counted on the Trento dataset. (a) s × s. (b) n h . (c) D. (d) m. (e) λ.
(f) α. (g) ε.

n h is changed from 8 to 16, the behavior of MICF-Nets
for Houston declines slightly. This is due to Houston’s low
spatial resolution, therefore, fewer attention heads are needed
to capture sufficient information.
3) Number of Dual-Branch CMAFT D: To investigate
the impacts of the number D of dual-branch CMAFT on
MICF-Net, we tune D from 1 to 4. Experimental results for
MICF-Nets with different D counted on the three datasets
are depicted in Figs. 9(c), 10(c), and 11(c). MICF-Nets’ OA
values on the three datasets first increase and then decrease,
and they perform best on all datasets when D = 2. The

reasons behind this are twofold. When there are too few dualbranch CMAFTs, they struggle to capture HSI and LiDAR’s
complex contents adequately. When too many dual-branch
CMAFTs exist, redundant parameters lead to over-fitting on
the training samples, thus hindering generalization. Therefore,
we recommend that D = 2.
4) Middle Layer Size of Project m: In Section III-B,
we fixed m to 8. Here, we change its values in the range of
[2, 16]. The results of MICF-Nets with various m counted on
three datasets are shown in Figs. 9(d), 10(d), and 11(d). As m
increases, the MICF-Nets’ overall performance is initially

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

5525416

Fig. 12. Feature distributions of MACN and MICF-Net, which are counted on three datasets using the t-SNE algorithm. The first row shows the results of
MACN, and the second row shows the results of MICF-Net. (a) Houston. (b) MUUFL. (c) Trento.

Fig. 13.

Studies on the impact of different numbers of training samples on different methods. (a) Houston. (b) MUUFL. (c) Trento.

upward and then downward, and their optimal values all
appear at m = 8. Hence, we recommend fixing the value
of m to 8.
5) Balance Coefficient in the Overall Loss λ: The balance
coefficient λ in the overall loss controls the importance of
the correlation term. A larger value of λ implies that the
spatial relationship similarity between the two modalities plays
a more significant role in improving the overall performance.
By changing the values of λ within the range [0.1, 0.9],
we can analyze its impacts on MICF-Net. As displayed in
Figs. 9(e), 10(e), and 11(e), the optimal values of λ are found
to be 0.3, 0.5, and 0.1 for Houston, MUUFL, and Trento,
respectively. This is attributed to the inherent differences in
the characteristics of the modalities present in each dataset.
For instance, since the similarity between modalities is
relatively high in Trento, a smaller value of λ (i.e., 0.1)
suffices to facilitate practical complementary information
mining. Conversely, in datasets with greater disparity between
modalities, such as Houston, a higher value of λ (i.e., 0.3)
is needed to enhance the importance of capturing spatial
relationship similarities.
6) Penalty Coefficient in AMM α: It signifies the tolerance
for imbalance between modalities. To examine its influence on
MICF-Net, we change its values from 0.1 to 0.9. As illustrated
in Figs. 9(f), 10(f), and 11(f), the models’ performance
consistently deteriorates when α increases. The optimal OA
values of MICF-Nets are obtained when α = 0.1 across
the three datasets. These findings are attributed to the
substantial disparity between HSI and LiDAT. A slight increase
in α significantly impedes the learning of the dominant

modal, resulting in a drastic performance decline. Therefore,
we recommend setting α to 0.1.
7) Momentum Parameter in AMM ε: This parameter plays
a crucial role in balancing historical prototypes with current
prototypes. To investigate its impacts on the proposed method,
we systematically varied the value of ε within the range of
[0.1, 0.9]. The OA values of MICF-Nets are summarized in
Figs. 9(g), 10(g), and 11(g). It is easy to find that the optimal
values of ε across the three datasets converge to 0.9. This is
because a larger ε tends to yield more stable pseudo-prediction
results. Conversely, opting for a smaller ε introduces greater
volatility, potentially disrupting the model learning process.
Therefore, we fix ε to 0.9.

F. Feature Visualization
To further verify the effectiveness of the designed MICFNet, we adopt the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding
(t-SNE) algorithm [63] to visualize the learned features.
MICF-Net’s feature distribution maps counted on the Houston,
MUUFL, and Trento datasets are displayed in the second row
of Fig. 12. Also, the feature distribution maps of the bestcompared models (i.e., MACN) are exhibited for reference
and can be found in the first row of Fig. 12. By comparing
the two sets of visual maps, it is easy to find that MICF-Net
can produce more explicit category boundaries and a higher
degree of aggregation of the same category. These positive
results verify the advantage of MICF-Net in feature extraction,
which is beneficial for the final classification.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE VI
M ODEL S IZE , T RAINING T IME , AND I NFERENCE T IME OF
E ACH A LGORITHM ON THE H OUSTON DATASET

G. Effect of Different Numbers of Training Samples
To evaluate the impact of different numbers of training
samples on the classification performance of MICF-Net,
we vary the number of training samples for each class
from 20 to 100 to train different MICF-Nets. Their OA
curves counted on the three datasets are drawn in Fig. 13.
The results of the compared methods are also counted for
reference. By analyzing these curves, we can see that the
performance of all methods improves as the number of
training samples increases. In addition, the proposed MICFNet consistently outperforms the other comparison models in
all cases. These investigations demonstrate both the rationality
and effectiveness of MICF-Net.
H. Complexity Analysis
This section studies MICF-Net’s parameter volume, training
time, and inference time. For clarity, we only use the Houston
dataset to count and exhibit the results in Table VI. The results
of the compared methods are also displayed for reference.
It is easy to observe that our MICF-Net is not optimal on
the three metrics but is competitive. Regarding model size,
we achieved the second smallest memory footprint at only
0.71 MB, which is very close to the smallest one. Moreover,
MICF-Net outperforms more than half of the compared
methods in training and inference time. Although MICF-Net
is slightly weaker than a few models in terms of training and
inference times, its improvement in classification performance
is significant (see Section IV-C). These observations affirm
that our MICF-Net is an effective model. The main reason
is that it achieves sufficient information interaction and
comprehensively explores the complementary relationship of
multimodal data.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes a new network (i.e., MICF-Net)
for joint classification tasks of HSI and LiDAR. It first
implements preliminary feature extraction of multimodal
data through a simple two-branch CNN network. Then, D
dual-branch CMAFTs are developed to mine long-distance
contextual clues in HSI and LiDAR data and realize
information interaction based on spatial similarity, further
enhancing feature representation. Next, the AMM module
further processes the features to address the learning imbalance
problem in cross-modal learning. By adaptively identifying

and suppressing the strong modality, the feature learning of
weak modalities is effectively promoted. Finally, considering
the heterogeneity and complementarity of multimodal data,
the SGFF module integrates multimodal features into a
discriminative fusion representation. Positive experimental
results on three public HSI and LiDAR joint classification
datasets verify the effectiveness of MICF-Net.
Although MICF-Net’s performance is good, it still has room
for improvement. For types with variable scales and shapes,
it is necessary to consider introducing multiscale structures
to extract diverse information. In addition, compared with
other models, MICF-Net is not the most lightweight and
efficient model. Therefore, how to further improve the model’s
efficiency and reduce resource consumption while ensuring
model performance is also a topic worthy of study.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. Sun et al., “Large kernel spectral and spatial attention networks for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5519915.
[2] X. Tang, R. Du, J. Ma, and X. Zhang, “Noisy remote sensing scene
classification via progressive learning based on multiscale information
exploration,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 24, p. 5706, Dec. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/24/5706
[3] N. Chen, J. Yue, L. Fang, and S. Xia, “SpectralDiff: A generative
framework for hyperspectral image classification with diffusion models,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5522416.
[4] D. Hong et al., “SpectralGPT: Spectral remote sensing foundation
model,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8,
pp. 5227–5244, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3362475.
[5] D. Hong, C. Li, B. Zhang, N. Yokoya, J. A. Benediktsson, and
J. Chanussot, “Multimodal artificial intelligence foundation models:
Unleashing the power of remote sensing big data in earth observation,”
Innovation, vol. 2, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 100055. [Online]. Available:
https://www.the-innovation.org/article/id/65e4f30cbf979918c9d8124d
[6] C. Li, B. Zhang, D. Hong, J. Yao, and J. Chanussot, “LRRNet: An interpretable deep unfolding network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5513412.
[7] J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Wang, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Representationenhanced status replay network for multisource remote-sensing image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., 2023, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3286422.
[8] Y. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised multiscale dynamic graph convolution
network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 6806–6820, May 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3212985.
[9] G. Vivone, “Multispectral and hyperspectral image fusion in
remote sensing: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 405–417,
Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1566253522001312
[10] H. Gao, H. Feng, Y. Zhang, S. Xu, and B. Zhang, “AMSSENet: Adaptive multiscale spatial–spectral enhancement network for
classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531317.
[11] Z. Xue, X. Tan, X. Yu, B. Liu, A. Yu, and P. Zhang, “Deep hierarchical
vision transformer for hyperspectral and LiDAR data classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 3095–3110, 2022.
[12] J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Gao, M. Zhang, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral
and SAR image classification via multiscale interactive fusion
network,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 12,
pp. 10823–10837, May 2023.
[13] S. Zhang, X. Meng, Q. Liu, G. Yang, and W. Sun, “Featuredecision level collaborative fusion network for hyperspectral and LiDAR
classification,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 17, p. 4148, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/17/4148
[14] A. Kuras, M. Brell, J. Rizzi, and I. Burud, “Hyperspectral and LiDAR
data applied to the urban land cover machine learning and neuralnetwork-based classification: A review,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 17,
p. 3393, Aug. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/20724292/13/17/3393

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: MICF-Net FOR JOINT CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSPECTRAL AND LiDAR DATA

[15] W. Dong, T. Yang, J. Qu, T. Zhang, S. Xiao, and Y. Li, “Joint
contextual representation model-informed interpretable network with
dictionary aligning for hyperspectral and LiDAR classification,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6804–6818,
Nov. 2023.
[16] W. Li, Y. Gao, M. Zhang, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Asymmetric feature fusion
network for hyperspectral and SAR image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 8057–8070, Oct. 2023.
[17] J.-Y. Yang, H.-C. Li, J.-H. Yang, L. Pan, Q. Du, and A. Plaza, “Multifrequency graph convolutional network with cross-modality mutual
enhancement for multisource remote sensing data classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5505914.
[18] Z. Xu, W. Jiang, and J. Geng, “Dual-branch dynamic modulation
network for hyperspectral and LiDAR data classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5514813.
[19] M. Wang, F. Gao, J. Dong, H.-C. Li, and Q. Du, “Nearest neighbor-based
contrastive learning for hyperspectral and LiDAR data classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5501816.
[20] X. Zhao et al., “Joint classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data
using hierarchical random walk and deep CNN architecture,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 7355–7370, Oct. 2020.
[21] S. Jia, X. Zhou, S. Jiang, and R. He, “Collaborative contrastive learning
for hyperspectral and LiDAR classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5507714.
[22] C. Ge, Q. Du, W. Sun, K. Wang, J. Li, and Y. Li, “Deep residual networkbased fusion framework for hyperspectral and LiDAR data,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 2458–2472, 2021.
[23] K. R. Shahi, P. Ghamisi, B. Rasti, P. Scheunders, and R. Gloaguen,
“Unsupervised data fusion with deeper perspective: A novel multisensor
deep clustering algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Obser.
Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 284–296, 2022.
[24] Y. Gao, M. Zhang, W. Li, X. Song, X. Jiang, and Y. Ma, “Adversarial
complementary learning for multisource remote sensing classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505613.
[25] Y. Zhang, Y. Peng, B. Tu, and Y. Liu, “Local information interaction
transformer for hyperspectral and LiDAR data classification,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16, pp. 1130–1143,
2023.
[26] M. Zhang, W. Li, Q. Du, L. Gao, and B. Zhang, “Feature extraction
for classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data using patch-to-patch
CNN,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 100–111, Jan. 2020.
[27] S. Mohla, S. Pande, B. Banerjee, and S. Chaudhuri, “FusAtNet:
Dual attention based SpectroSpatial multimodal fusion network for
hyperspectral and LiDAR classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020,
pp. 416–425.
[28] M. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral
and LiDAR data classification based on structural optimization
transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 3153–3164,
May 2023.
[29] W. Wang, D. Tran, and M. Feiszli, “What makes training multi-modal
classification networks hard?” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 12692–12702.
[30] X. Peng, Y. Wei, A. Deng, D. Wang, and D. Hu, “Balanced multimodal
learning via on-the-fly gradient modulation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 8228–8237.
[31] D. Hong et al., “More diverse means better: Multimodal deep learning
meets remote-sensing imagery classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 4340–4354, May 2021.
[32] H.-C. Li, W.-S. Hu, W. Li, J. Li, Q. Du, and A. Plaza, “A3 CLNN:
Spatial, spectral and multiscale attention ConvLSTM neural network
for multisource remote sensing data classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 747–761, Feb. 2022.
[33] Z. Wang, C. Li, A. Zheng, R. He, and J. Tang, “Interact, embed,
and enlarge: Boosting modality-specific representations for multi-modal
person re-identification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36,
no. 3, pp. 2633–2641.
[34] X. Xu, W. Li, Q. Ran, Q. Du, L. Gao, and B. Zhang, “Multisource remote
sensing data classification based on convolutional neural network,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 937–949, Feb. 2018.
[35] Y. Fan et al., “MSLAENet: Multiscale learning and attention
enhancement network for fusion classification of hyperspectral and
LiDAR data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 15, pp. 10041–10054, 2022.
[36] W. Yu, L. Gao, H. Huang, Y. Shen, and G. Shen, “HI2 D2 FNet:
Hyperspectral intrinsic image decomposition guided data fusion network
for hyperspectral and LiDAR classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5521715.

5525416

[37] J. Li, Y. Liu, R. Song, Y. Li, K. Han, and Q. Du, “Sal2 RN: A spatial–
spectral salient reinforcement network for hyperspectral and LiDAR data
fusion classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5500114.
[38] W. Song, Y. Dai, Z. Gao, L. Fang, and Y. Zhang, “Hashing-based deep
metric learning for the classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5704513.
[39] Y. Feng, L. Song, L. Wang, and X. Wang, “DSHFNet: Dynamic
scale hierarchical fusion network based on multi-attention for hyperspectral image and LiDAR data classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5522514.
[40] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2021, pp. 1–22. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy
[41] Y. Zhang et al., “Multimodal transformer network for hyperspectral and
LiDAR classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5514317.
[42] J. Yao, B. Zhang, C. Li, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Extended vision
transformer (ExViT) for land use and land cover classification: A
multimodal deep learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5514415.
[43] M. Zhang, W. Li, R. Tao, H. Li, and Q. Du, “Information fusion for
classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data using IP-CNN,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5506812.
[44] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Convolutional neural networks
for multimodal remote sensing data classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517010.
[45] T. Lu, K. Ding, W. Fu, S. Li, and A. Guo, “Coupled adversarial
learning for fusion classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 93, pp. 118–131, May 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S156625352200269X
[46] R. Hang, X. Qian, and Q. Liu, “Cross-modality contrastive learning for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5532812.
[47] Z. Feng, L. Song, S. Yang, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Cross-modal
contrastive learning for remote sensing image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5517713.
[48] R. Hang, Z. Li, P. Ghamisi, D. Hong, G. Xia, and Q. Liu, “Classification
of hyperspectral and LiDAR data using coupled CNNs,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 4939–4950, Jul. 2020.
[49] X. Wang, Y. Feng, R. Song, Z. Mu, and C. Song, “Multiattentive hierarchical dense fusion net for fusion classification of
hyperspectral and LiDAR data,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 82, pp. 1–18,
Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S156625352100258X
[50] M. Meyer and D. Gokhale, “Kullback–Leibler information measure for
studying convergence rates of densities and distributions,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1401–1404, Jul. 1993.
[51] X. Geng et al., “Multisource joint representation learning fusion
classification for remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4406414.
[52] Y. Fan, W. Xu, H. Wang, J. Wang, and S. Guo, “PMR:
Prototypical modal rebalance for multimodal learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 20029–20038.
[53] Q. Liu, L. Xiao, N. Huang and J. Tang, “Composite neighbor-aware
convolutional metric networks for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 9297–9311,
Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3232532.
[54] J. E. Shore and R. M. Gray, “Minimum cross-entropy pattern
classification and cluster analysis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. PAMI-4, no. 1, pp. 11–17, Jan. 1982.
[55] C. Debes et al., “Hyperspectral and LiDAR data fusion: Outcome of
the 2013 GRSS data fusion contest,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2405–2418, Jun. 2014.
[56] J. Xia, N. Yokoya, and A. Iwasaki, “A novel ensemble classifier of
hyperspectral and LiDAR data using morphological features,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Mar. 2017,
pp. 6185–6189.
[57] S. Imambi, K. B. Prakash, and G. R. Kanagachidambaresan, “PyTorch,”
in Programming With TensorFlow: Solution for Edge Computing
Applications. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021, pp. 87–104, doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-57077-4_10.
[58] J. Wang, J. Li, Y. Shi, J. Lai, and X. Tan, “AM3 Net: Adaptive mutuallearning-based multimodal data fusion network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 5411–5426, Aug. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5525416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

[59] K. Ding, T. Lu, W. Fu, S. Li, and F. Ma, “Global–local transformer
network for HSI and LiDAR data joint classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5541213.
[60] G. Zhao, Q. Ye, L. Sun, Z. Wu, C. Pan, and B. Jeon, “Joint
classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data using a hierarchical CNN
and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5500716.
[61] S. K. Roy, A. Deria, D. Hong, B. Rasti, A. Plaza, and J. Chanussot,
“Multimodal fusion transformer for remote sensing image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5515620.
[62] K. Li, D. Wang, X. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wu, and Q. Wang, “Mixing selfattention and convolution: A unified framework for multi-source remote
sensing data classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5523216.
[63] S. Arora, W. Hu, and P. K. Kothari, “An analysis of the t-SNE
algorithm for data visualization,” in Proc. Conf. Learn. Theory, 2018,
pp. 1455–1462.
Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuits
and systems from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery at the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently a Full Professor with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of the Ministry of Education, Xidian University.
His research interests include remote sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remote
sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, please refer
to: https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/.
Yizhou Zou received the B.E. degree in intelligent
science and technology from Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2022, where he is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science and
technology with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry
of Education.
His research interests include image understanding, hyperspectral image classification, and deep
learning.

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with
the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include
computational intelligence and image understanding.

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is currently a Professor with the Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine
learning, and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.

Fang Liu (Member, IEEE) was born in China,
in 1990. She received the B.S. degree in information
and computing science from Henan University,
Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree
in intelligent information processing from Xidian
University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China. Her research interests include deep
learning, object detection, polarimetric SAR image
classification, and change detection.

Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education. He has authored or coauthored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include signal
and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet theory,
natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is a member of the IEEE Xian Section Executive Committee and
an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:53:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

