IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

5509719

Spatial Pooling Transformer Network and
Noise-Tolerant Learning for Noisy
Hyperspectral Image Classification
Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE, Yizhou Zou, Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu , Member, IEEE, and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Hyperspectral image (HSI) classification is a hot
topic in remote sensing (RS). A large number of studies have
been proposed and achieved excellent performance. Most of
them rely on accurate annotations. However, this requirement
cannot always be met. Due to the complex contents within HSIs
and the uncontrollable external interference factors, incorrect
labels are inevitable. Thus, the study of noisy HSI classification
is boomed. Some attempts have been made, and their central
ideas are to filter the noisy samples from the training set.
Although feasible, this would result in information loss, i.e.,
the contents covered by the removed samples are ignored.
Besides, the characteristics of HSIs are not fully considered in
many models. To overcome the above limitations, we develop
a spatial pooling transformer network (SPTNet) and a noisetolerant learning algorithm (NTLA) in this article. SPTNet first
uses a spectral feature extraction (SFE) module to capture
the rich spectral information from HSI patches. Then, three
spatial pooling transformers (SPTs) are constructed and stacked
to explore the spatial knowledge and depress confusing clues
caused by the HSI patch division. Finally, a standard transformer
encoder is used to enhance the obtained spectral–spatial features
for the downstream classification. To use SPTNet to handle
noisy HSI classification, the noise-tolerant learning algorithm is
designed. It encloses two parts, i.e., a data partition scheme and
a label-independent similarity regularization. The data partition
scheme divides the training data into clean and noisy sets. Then,
the clean samples are used to train SPTNet with the classification
loss function. At the same time, similarity regularization helps
SPTNet to comprehensively understand HSIs by analyzing the
resemblance between clean and noisy samples. Integrating two
parts into a cotraining framework, SPTNets can be trained under
a noisy scenario. Four popular HSI datasets are selected to
testify to our methods. The positive results demonstrate that the
combination of SPTNet and the noise-tolerant learning algorithm
Manuscript received 30 June 2023; revised 29 October 2023 and 21 January
2024; accepted 18 February 2024. Date of publication 20 February 2024; date
of current version 28 February 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62171332 and
Grant 62276197, in part by the Key Research and Development Program of
Shaanxi under Grant 2024GX-YBXM-125, in part by the Natural Science
Basic Research Program of Shaanxi under Grant 2024JC-YBMS-472, and in
part by the Shaanxi Province Innovation Capability Support Plan under Grant
2023-CX-TD-09. (Corresponding author: Xu Tang.)
Jingjing Ma, Yizhou Zou, Xu Tang, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding,
Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information, Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing 210094, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3368079, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3368079

is helpful to the noisy HSI classification. Our source codes are
available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/HyperspectralImages-Classification/tree/main/SPTNet-NTLA.
Index Terms— Hyperspectral image (HSI) classification, noisy
labels.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

N RECENT years, with the rapid development of remote
sensing (RS) technology, hyperspectral images (HSIs) have
gained growing attention [1]. Owing to the hundreds of
narrow and contiguous spectral bands, HSIs contain gorgeous
spatial–spectral information, which is conducive to analyzing
the diverse land covers [2]. Among various HSI image processing techniques, HSI classification is a fundamental one aiming
to provide semantic labels for each pixel within an HSI [3].
The solid classification results can be applied to numerous RS
applications, such as agricultural administration [4], ecological
observation [5], and so on.
Over the last decades, many HSI classification methods
have been proposed [6], [7], [8]. In the beginning, scholars
completed the classification in two steps [9], i.e., low-level
visual feature extraction and classifier development based on
traditional machine learning. At that time, the classification
results are acceptable but satisfactory. The reasons are twofold.
One is the contradiction between the complex contents within
HSIs and the low representation capacity of handcrafted visual
features. The other one is that the independent classifiers cannot capture the feature distributions well. When deep learning
appears, the HSI classification is suddenly enlightened [10],
[11]. Diverse deep neural networks, such as autoencoder [12],
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [13], and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [14], [15], are adopted and developed
to deal with HSI classification tasks [16]. Owing to the strong
feature learning capacity and combination of feature extraction
and classification, these methods achieve cracking classification performance. Recently, visual transformer [17], [18]
enters the HSI community. In contrast to CNNs and other deep
models, the visual transformer is good at modeling the longdistance relations within HSIs. Thus, the global contextual
information hidden in HSIs can be captured, which is good
for the final classification [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24].
Although the above methods have succeeded in HSI classification, they almost depend on an assumption, i.e., the given
manual labels are correct. In other words, the training samples

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

have credible ground truths, which can guide the model to
capture valuable information from HSIs for the downstream
classification. Nevertheless, this hypothesis is not always
true in practice [25]. Due to the complex contents of HSIs
and their high-dimensional properties, incorrect annotation is
inevitable [26]. Consequently, developing robust classification
methods with the consideration of the negative influence of
noisy labels is an urgent and necessary task. Despite some
rewarding attempts that have been made on this topic [27],
[28], [29], there is still much potential for improvement. First,
most existing methods are habituated to adopting CNNs as
the feature extraction backbones. Thus, the local clues within
HSIs can be fully explored. However, the global contexts
hidden in HSIs are always ignored, limiting their performance
more or less. Second, selecting and removing the possible
noise samples are critical in the current models. This is
feasible; however, some samples with clean labels would
also be eliminated, leading to information loss. Besides, the
noisy sample filtering scheme may aggravate the imbalance
issue in HSI classification. Last but not least, although the
noisy samples have incorrect labels, the contents they covered
are still valuable for understanding HSIs. Nevertheless, most
models only focus on their negative influence but neglect
their positive functions, leading the model cannot capture the
contents completely.
To overcome the above limitations, we propose a spatial
pooling transformer network (SPTNet) and a noise-tolerant
learning algorithm (NTLA) in this article. The function of
SPTNet is to fully explore the valuable spectral–spatial information from HSIs. To this end, besides adopting 2-D and
3-D CNNs, a spatial pooling transformer (SPT) is developed.
Combining them allows the knowledge hidden in HSIs to be
mined from local and global aspects. The function of the noisetolerant learning algorithm is to ensure that the SPTNet can
work smoothly under a noisy scenario. To achieve this goal,
a data partition scheme is first designed to select the clean samples for training SPTNet with the classification loss function.
Besides, instead of a single SPTNet, the algorithm leverages
two SPTNets at the same time to enhance the creditable of
selected clean samples. Then, a similarity regularization is
developed to mine information from both clean and noisy
samples, avoiding the information loss caused by the noisy
sample filtering. After integrating the above parts, SPTNet can
be trained with noisy data.
The main contributions of this article are summarized as
follows.
1) A robust noisy HSI classification framework is proposed,
including a feature extraction network (i.e., SPTNet)
and a noise-tolerant algorithm. Accurate classification
results can be achieved by combining discriminative
spatial–spectral features and specific processing methods
for noisy labels.
2) SPTNet is a simple model mainly involving 2-D/3D CNNs and SPTs. CNNs take charge of capturing
the spectral information from HSIs, while the SPTs
focus on organizing the spatial information of HSIs
and mitigating the redundant information introduced by
HSI patches. This way, the valuable features of HSIs

can be obtained, and the specific characteristics of HSI
classification tasks can be considered.
3) A specific learning algorithm is designed to guarantee
SPTNet’s performance under noisy conditions. Not only
the statistical model but also the advanced learning
paradigms are incorporated into our algorithm. Consequently, the negative impacts of noisy samples can
be whittled down, and the contents in HSIs can be
interpreted accurately and thoroughly.
The remaining parts of this article are organized as follows.
Section II reviews some published studies on HSI classification, noisy label learning, and HSI classification with noisy
labels. In Section III, our SPTNet and the noise-tolerant
learning algorithm will be introduced in detail. Experiment
results on four public HSI datasets are discussed in Section IV.
Finally, a short conclusion is drawn in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we review the published works from the
following aspects, i.e., HSI classification, learning with noisy
labels, and HSI classification with noisy labels.
A. HSI Classification
Nowadays, CNNs and their variants have dominated the
HSI classification community. Benefiting from the stacked
structure and nonlinear fitting talents, CNNs can explore the
spatial–spectral information from HSIs for accurate classification results [30], [31], [32], [33]. Considering the cube
properties of HSIs, a 3-D octave convolution network with
a spatial–spectral attention mechanism was proposed in [34].
The authors first expand the original octave convolution into
a 3-D version to explore the spatial–spectral clues from
HSIs with a relatively time cost. Then, the spatial–spectral
attention mechanism is developed to enhance the obtained
features mutually. The reported results counted on four HSIs
confirm its usefulness. Lv et al. [35] introduced an efficient spatial–spectral interaction network to speed up the
classification process. Instead of using normal convolution,
a lightweight operator named involution is developed to focus
on spectral messages with the consideration of redundant
information reduction. Also, a dual-pooling layer is proposed to pay attention to spatial clues. Based on them, the
HSI classification can be completed efficiently. Besides the
supervised models mentioned above, some semisupervised
and unsupervised methods were also developed. For instance,
based on the graph convolution network (GCN), a semisupervised network was presented in [36] named dynamic
multiscale graph convolutional network classifier (DMSGer).
Similar to common GCN-based models, DMSGer leverages
the superpixel technique to construct a small graph. Different
from common GCN-based models, DMSGer updates pixellevel features rather than the superpixel-level representations
directly. Finally, a simple label propagation scheme can
achieve classification results. Zhang et al. [37] proposed an
unsupervised CNN feature extraction network for HSI classification to release the burdens of manual labels. By integrating
the simple noniterative clustering algorithm, convolutional

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

encoder–decoder, and the random forest classifier, favorable
results can be obtained.
Recently, since the transformer is good at modeling the
long-distance relations hidden in images, many methods have
been developed based on it for diverse RS tasks [38], [39],
[40], [41]. Unlike the fixed receptive field of CNNs, the
transformer uses the multihead self-attention (MHSA) to
model a global receptive field. In the HSI classification
field, the transformer is also prevalent. In [42], a groupaware hierarchical transformer was developed. By merging
MSHA and a grouped pixel embedding (GPE) module,
the spatial–spectral features of HSIs can be learned in a
local–global way. Then, the accurate classification results
are generated by a hierarchical combination of MSHA and
GPE. Bai et al. [43] proposed a multibranch transformer for
HSI classification, which involves a spatial attention module
and a multibranch prediction method. The spatial attention
module aims to explore the positional relationships in the
HSI patches, while the multibranch prediction method pays
attention to enhancing the final representations. The positive
classification maps illustrate their effectiveness. Yu et al. [44]
introduced a multilevel transformer network to classify HSIs.
In this network, valuable spatial information is explored by
transformer encoders. Also, the spectral messages are captured by a multilevel feature fusion decoder. This way, the
comprehensive representation of HSIs can be obtained for
the downstream classification. Zhang et al. [45] proposed a
lightweight transformer network to handle HSI classification.
The network includes two lightweight self-attention modules
that explicitly extract local information in shallow layers and
capture long-range dependencies in deep layers. Therefore,
the model can reduce the amount of memory and calculation
while ensuring superior classification performance. An HSI
classification framework based on multiattention transformer
and active learning was proposed by Zhao et al. [46], in which
an outlook-attention module is combined with a self-attention
module to encode fine-level features and global context relationships. Furthermore, the active learning method based on
superpixel segmentation overcomes the shortage of training
samples and ensures accurate classification results.
B. Learning With Noisy Labels
Learning with the noisy label first emerged in computer
vision [47], [48]. Since reliable labels are difficult to obtain,
this topic is significant in practice. So far, a large number
of methods have been proposed, and they can be partitioned
into two groups roughly. In the first group, the methods are
accustomed to discovering noisy labels and decreasing their
influence. For example, Shu et al. [49] developed a sample
weighting algorithm to weaken the influence of noises in
the training stage. The weighting function is initialized by
small unbiased samples and can be updated with the model
learning. The optimal weighting function and model can be
obtained simultaneously by adaptively minimizing the possible
noisy samples’ weights. Another noisy label selection method
was presented in [50]. The cotraining strategy is adopted to
find the small-loss samples. Along with a specific joint loss,

5509719

the noisy labels can be eliminated from the training data
automatically. To further address the class imbalance caused
by noisy label removal, a sample selection strategy based on
contrastive learning was developed [51]. This strategy is robust
to various label noises by embedding the Jensen–Shannon
divergence algorithm. The noisy labels can be found and
erased appropriately with the assistance of class-balance prior.
In the second group, the methods are habituated to enhancing the model’s robustness to noisy labels. Based on the
normal cross-entropy (CE) loss function, Wang et al. [52]
designed a symmetric CE (SCE) loss to boost the robustness
of the model to noisy labels. SCE consists of a CE term and
a reverse CE term, which focus on achieving convergence
and tolerating the noises, respectively. After applying this
simple yet useful loss function, the model can be trained
with noisy labels smoothly. Ma et al. [53] proposed another
loss function for model training under the noisy scenario,
named active passive loss (APL). APL synchronously takes
the labeled and other classes into account and combines
active and passive loss functions together for model training.
The positive experimental results confirm the usefulness of
APL. Inspired by the nearest-neighbor theory, a new learning
algorithm was developed in [54]. Considering the similarities
between samples, the specific learning algorithm can deal with
the possible noises distinctly.
C. HSI Classification With Noisy Labels
Scholars in the HSI classification community also pay
attention to the noisy label learning topic. As early as
2018, Jiang et al. [27] proposed a random label propagation
algorithm (RLPA) for HSI classification with noisy labels.
Based on random label propagation and ensemble learning,
the noisy samples can be selected, and their labels can be
corrected for the final classification. With the help of the density peak clustering algorithm, a noisy label detection method
was developed in [55]. The algorithm first calculates the
similarities between training samples. Then, a local densitybased decision function is applied to search the potential
noises. Similar work was also published in [56], where the
energy of training data is analyzed for selecting the noises.
Another label noise-cleaning method was presented in [57].
HSIs are first oversegmented into superpixels for constructing
a graph. Then, the noise elimination problem is transformed
into a label propagation task and accomplished by a graph
constraint. The reported results on several HSIs illustrate that
noisy labels can be removed justly. Xu et al. [58] developed a
superpixel-guided sample selection network in which the noise
selection and correction are integrated. On the one hand, the
samples with high loss values are regarded as possible noisy
samples. On the other hand, superpixels are used to correct
their labels. In this way, the information loss caused by the
elimination can be avoided, and classification accuracy can
be guaranteed. Instead of finding and abolishing the noisy
labels, a dual-channel residual network (DCRN) was proposed
in [59]. Owing to the residual and dual-branch structure, the
network can explore the relations among interclass/intraclass
samples. Besides, a specific loss function is utilized to reduce

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Proposed SPTNet. The details of the SPT are shown in the dotted box on the bottom right.

the influence of noisy labels as much as possible. By combining them together, remarkable HSI classification results can
be ensured. A triple contrast representation learning (TCRL)
method was proposed by Zhang et al. [60] for noisy HSI classification. Based on different enhancement transformations,
corresponding learning losses are used to explore cluster-level,
instance-level, and structure-level representations, effectively
reducing the negative impact of noisy samples and ensuring
accurate classification in noisy scenes.
III. M ETHOD
A. Problem Statement
Before introducing the proposed SPTNet and the noisetolerant learning method, the problem that this article needs
to solve is defined in this section. For an HSI with c classes,
suppose there is a set of pixels X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } with
semantic labels Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn }, where xi indicates the
b-dimensional spectral representation of the ith pixel and
yi denotes the one-hot label vector with a dimension of c.
Generally speaking, we believe in the correctness of labels
and use these labeled pixels to train the classification model
directly under the supervised learning paradigm. In the current
deep era, the popular classification models are deep neural
networks (e.g., CNNs and transformers), and the principal loss
function is the CE loss. However, the problem we are facing
is that some labels are incorrect. In other words, some pixels
are misannotated manually. To depict this situation, we define
another set of labels Ȳ = { ȳ 1 , ȳ 2 , . . . , ȳ n }. When ȳ i ̸= yi ,
ȳ i can be regarded as a noisy label. Also, the ratio of noisy
labels’ numbers to whole labels’ volume is defined as the noisy
rate r . In this case, the common deep networks with a CE
loss would be out of work. This is because they easily overfit
the noisy samples [48]. Therefore, specific deep models or
subtle learning strategies should be developed to handle HSI
classification with noisy labels.
B. Spatial Pooling Transformer Network
Considering the characteristics of HSIs, we construct SPTNet in this section, whose architecture is shown in Fig. 1.

First, SPTNet leverages a spectral feature extraction (SFE)
module to capture spectral information from HSIs. Then, three
SPTs are used to explore spatial knowledge from a global
aspect. Finally, a transformer encoder, a global average pooling
(GAP), and a fully connected (FC) layer are adopted in serial
to produce the final classification maps. Now, we introduce
each component of SPTNet in detail.
Instead of an HSI, we extract patches centered on labeled
pixels from the original HSI as the input of our SPTNet. The
HSI patch can be denoted as I ∈ Rs×s×b , where s × s denotes
the patch size and b indicates the number of spectral bands.
After feeding the patch into SPTNet, it would first be mapped
into an spectral feature map f ∈ Rs×s×c by the SFE module.
The structure of SFE can be found in Fig. 1, which consists
of a 3-D CNN block and a 2-D CNN block. Each block
involves a convolutional layer, a BatchNorm (BN) layer, and a
leaky rectified linear unit (ReLU) layer. The kernel size for the
convolutional layer in the 3-D CNN block is 5 × 1 × 1. Also,
the kernel size of the convolutional layer in the 2-D CNN
block is 1 × 1. The reason for choosing such convolution
kernels is that they are able to maintain the relative positions
of pixels, which is beneficial to subsequent modules to mine
spatial contents. Due to the structure of 3-D CNNs, when using
them to process the spectral bands of HSIs, the bands are
partitioned into segments first and then subjected to separate
feature extraction. Relatively, 2-D CNNs leverage complete
spectral bands to capture the spectral knowledge. Therefore,
stacking 3-D and 2-D CNNs is beneficial to extract valuable
spectral knowledge simultaneously. Here, the 3-D and 2-D
convolutions numbers are 8 and 64, respectively. Thus, the
output feature map f has 64 channels, i.e., c = 64.
Next, the obtained f will be fed into three SPTs to capture
the global spatial information. Since the three SPTs are
the same, we only explain the first SPT for clarity. Before
inputting f into the first SPT, we flatten it into a sequence
data p0 ∈ R N0 ×c , where N0 = s × s. The structure of SPT
can be found at the bottom of Fig. 1. SPT encompasses a
standard transformer encoder and a spatial pooling module.
The transformer encoder involves a positional embedding

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

operation, two layer normalizations (LNs), an MHSA, and a
multilayer perception (MLP). Besides positional embedding
operation, other parts are connected in a residual way. When
p0 is input, the positional embedding operation would add
a learnable vector Pe ∈ R N0 ×c to it to record the positional
relations. This step can be formulated as follows:
z0 = p0 + Pe

(1)

where z0 ∈ R N0 ×c . Then, the first LN and MHSA would be
applied on z0 to generate z′0 ∈ R N0 ×c that is rich in the
global relationships between different elements. This step can
be defined as follows:

z′0 = MHSA z0L + z0 , z0L = LN(z0 )

MHSA z0L = Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headh )W


Qi KT
headi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = Softmax √ i Vi
d
L
i
L
i
L
i
Qi = z0 Wq , K = z0 Wk , V = z0 Wv
(2)
where z0L implies the normalized version of z0 ; headi is the
ith self-attention head; Qi , Ki , and Vi are the ith key, query,
and value of z0L ; W ∈ Rc×c , Wiq ∈ Rc×c/ h , Wik ∈ Rc×c/ h ,
and Wiv ∈ Rc×c/ h indicate learnable parameter matrices;
and LN(·), MHSA(·), Concat(·), Attention(·), and Softmax(·)
indicate the LN, MHSA, concatenation, self-attention, and
softmax functions. Next, z′0 would be mapped into z′′0 ∈ R N0 ×c
by the second LN layer and MLP. MLP contains two FC layers
with the Gaussian error linear unit (GELU) activation function.
This process is expressed as follows:

z′′0 = MLP LN z′0 + z′0
(3)
where MLP(·) denotes the MLP function.
The current z′′0 incorporates rich spectral information and
gorgeous global spatial messages. However, some possible
redundant knowledge still exists in z′′0 . This is because the
pixels within an HSI patch may belong to various semantic
categories. To mitigate this problem and remove the redundant
knowledge as much as possible, we develop a simple yet
useful spatial pooling module, whose flowchart can be found
in Fig. 1. In particular, z′′0 is first reshaped into a 2-D version
m ∈ Rs×s×c . Based on the assumption that the closer a
pixel is to the center point in terms of pixels, the higher the
probability that its attributes are similar to those of the center
point [61], [62], the possible redundant knowledge should
be concentrated in the edge areas of m. Thus, we retain
a square area closer to its center point while deleting the
peripheral areas for producing m′ ∈ R(s−l)×(s−l)×c . In this
fashion, redundant information can be eliminated while helpful
information can be retained and emphasized. Then, m′ would
be flattened into the sequence data p1 ∈ R N1 ×c , where N1 =
(s − l) × (s − l). Note that to avoid unadvisedly filtering too
much useful information along with the removal of redundant
clues, we only remove the outermost information of the feature
map. To this end, we set l = 2. The spatial pooling discussed
above can be formulated as follows:

p1 = Flatten m′ , m′ = SPooling(m)
(4)

5509719

where Flatten(·) and SPooling(·) indicate the flatten and spatial
pooling operations.
After three SPTs, the valuable features can be fully explored
from HSI patches. Then, a transformer encoder is embedded at
the top of SPTs to retain more effective information, thereby
enhancing the diversity of feature descriptions and obtaining a
more generalized representation. Along with a GAP layer and
an FC layer, the final classification maps can be produced.
Overall, SPTNet is a simple model. Its core component
(i.e., SPT) is also a straightforward module that merely combines a standard transformer encoder and a spatial pooling
module. However, they fully consider the characteristics of
HSIs and the specifics of HSI land-cover classification. First,
SPTNet can explore the spectral–spatial information within
HSIs, which is important to the classification. By applying
the 2-D and 3-D convolutions to HSIs, SPTNet can capture
the spectral features of HSIs from the local and global aspects.
Meanwhile, SPTNet leverages three SPTs and a normal transformer encoder to analyze the spatial knowledge within HSIs
from the global perspective. Second, since the input data
of SPTNet are HSI patches cut from the original HSI, the
pixels within a patch may belong to various semantics. The
pixels that differ from the central pixel in terms of their
semantics create redundant information that interferes with
the model’s ability to extract valuable information from HSIs.
To mitigate this problem and remove the redundant knowledge
as much as possible, a simple yet useful spatial pooling module
is developed. Combining it with the standard transformer
encoder (i.e., SPT), the spatial clues can be discovered, and
the interference messages can be filtered. Although SPTNet is
simple, its performance is competitive in both noisy and noisefree conditions. The details can be found in Sections IV-C
and IV-D.
C. Noise-Tolerant Learning Algorithm
Although SPTNet can classify HSIs normally, its performance drops sharply when noisy samples exist. To guarantee
SPTNet’s behavior under the noisy scenario, we develop
a noise-tolerant learning algorithm in this section, whose
flowchart for a training epoch is shown in Fig. 2.
An intuitive approach for whittling down the negative influence of noisy samples is to select and remove them from the
training set. According to the conclusions in [58] and [63],
the loss values of clean samples obtained by deep models are
always lower than those of noisy samples in the early model
training stage. Therefore, we design a simple data partition
scheme with the assistance of a two-component Gaussian
mixture model (GMM) [64] to distinguish the possible noisy
samples hidden in the training set. Here, GMM is chosen
because of its strong ability in the sharpness of distribution [65]. Thus, compared with other statistical models, GMM
excels at discriminating between noise and clean samples.
In particular, we first feed all training samples (X, Ȳ ) into
SPTNet and get their loss values. Then, the two-component
GMM is used to fit these losses, and the Gaussian component
with a smaller mean value is deemed as the distribution of
clean samples. After calculating the posterior probability of

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 2. Schematic of each training session of the proposed SRSPTNet. The upper and lower branches represent the process of cotraining. The similarity loss
is obtained in the part between the two branches. The two jointly participate in the update of the network.

each sample belonging to the small-mean Gaussian component
wi , we can divide X into a clean set Xc and a noisy set Xn
using a threshold τ . This process can be defined as follows:
(

xi , ȳ i ∈ Xc , wi ≥ τ

(5)
xi , ȳ i ∈ Xn , wi < τ.
Next, the samples in the clean set Xc would be adopted to
update the SPTNet’s parameters in a mini-batch way for the
final classification. Note that the data partition is carried out
only once per epoch, and our SPTNet will be warmed up
before the first partition. Here, the warm-up denotes that we
use all training data to train SPTNet along with the normal
CE loss function.
Although the above method can select clean samples, noisy
data will inevitably be mixed. With the increase of training
rounds, the self-selection of a single SPTNet will gradually
accumulate errors and cause performance degradation. To mitigate this problem, we introduce the cotraining mechanism [66]
here. In detail, two SPTNets are used to select two sets of
clean samples Xc1 and Xc2 , independently. Then, the clean
samples in Xc1 /Xc2 are adopted to update the second/first
SPTNet’s parameters mutually by counting the CE losses,
whose definitions are
X

1
2
L1CE = − c
ȳ i · log f xi2 , θ1
|X2 |  2 
xi2 , ȳ i ∈Xc2

L2CE = −

X
1
c
|X1 |  1 
xi1 , ȳ i

1

ȳ i · log f xi1 , θ2



(6)

∈Xc1

where (xi1 , yi1 ) and (xi2 , yi2 ) imply the clean samples within Xc1
and Xc2 , f (·) means the mapping function of SPTNet, θ1 and
θ2 are the parameters of the first and second SPTNets, and
|Xc1 | and |Xc2 | denote the sizes of two clean sets.
So far, we have reduced the negative influence of the
samples with incorrect labels for training SPTNet. Nevertheless, there is another point we should pay attention to,
that is, the information covered by those noisy samples is
missing, which prevents SPTNet from fully understanding

HSIs. Especially, when the noise rate is high, a large number
of samples would be filtered out, which is adverse to capturing
rich knowledge from HSIs comprehensively. To overcome this
limitation, we develop a similarity regularization inspired by
contrastive learning [67], [68]. It aims to help SPTNet explore
the messages contained in all samples without considering the
labels. The basic idea of our similarity regularization is that
similar pixels should have similar predictions. In other words,
the feature representations of similar pixels should be more
consistent. To this end, we first construct a similar pixel pair
set and then design the proper loss function for these pairs.
Specifically, the simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC)
[69] algorithm is applied to segment an HSI into M homogeneous regions {ξ1 , ξ2 , . . . , ξ M }. Owing to the characteristics
of the superpixel, the pixels within a superpixel ξm share
comparable attributes. In addition, those pixels are adjacent in
spatial. Thus, they can be regarded as similar pixels. According
to the above discussion, we can construct two similar pixel pair
sets H1 and H2 for two SPTNets, whose definitions are



H1 = pi1 , p1j xi , x j ∈ ξm



H2 = pi2 , p2j xi , x j ∈ ξm
(7)
where i ̸= j, and (pi1 , p1j ) and (pi2 , p2j ) represent the probability vectors of (xi , x j ) generated by the first and second
SPTNets. At the same time, considering the mutual interaction
of two SPTNets, another similar pixel pair set H3 can also be
constructed, and it can be formulated as follows:



H3 = pi1 , p2j xi , x j ∈ ξm
(8)
where i can be equal to j. The final similar pixel pair set is
denoted as H = H1 ∪ H2 ∪ H3 . Note that the SLIC method
only needs to be executed once in our learning algorithm.
After obtaining the similar pixel pairs, we develop a similarity loss to mine the profitable clues from them. Specifically,
n
given the training data{(xi , ȳ i )}i=1
, we can construct a similarity label matrix A ∈ R2n×2n , whose definition is
(
Auv = 1, (pu , pv ) ∈ H
(9)
Auv = 0, otherwise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

5509719

This matrix indicates whether pairs of pixels are similar or
not. Following [68], we measure the similarity of pixel pairs
by computing the inner product of the probability vectors of
two pixels, i.e., Suv = puT · pv , which can be regarded as the
predicted similarity posterior probability. Thus, the similarity
prediction issue can be transformed into a binary classification
problem. Therefore, the similarity loss is expressed as follows:
2n

Ls = −

1 XX
Auv log Suv + (1 − Auv ) log(1 − Suv ).
(2n)2 u=1 u̸=v
(10)

The similarity loss ensures that pixels from homogenous
regions have similar probability distributions and enhances the
information interaction between the two networks. In this way,
the knowledge covered by the noisy samples can be mined by
our SPTNet. Moreover, since this loss is label-independent,
it is robust to label noise inherently.
Based on the above discussion, the final loss functions for
two SPTNets are
L1 = λs Ls + (1 − λs )L1CE
L2 = λs Ls + (1 − λs )L2CE

(11)

where λs is a free parameter to balance the importance of the
CE loss and similarity loss. In the test phase, we average the
predictions of the two models as the final prediction to obtain
more refined results.
The noise-tolerant learning algorithm discussed in this
section is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Noise-Tolerant Learning Algorithm
Input: Training data X and noisy label Ȳ, two SPTNets θ1
and θ2 , training rounds E all , warm-up rounds E w .
1: for epoch=1 to E all do
2:
if epoch ≤ E w then
3:
θ1 ← warmup(X, Ȳ , θ1 )
4:
θ2 ← warmup(X, Ȳ , θ2 )
5:
else
6:
Xc1 , Xn1 ← GMM(X, Ȳ , θ1 )
7:
Xc2 , Xn2 ← GMM(X, Ȳ , θ2 )
8:
Divide mini-batch Xd from X, d ∈ {1, . . . , D}
9:
for d=1 to D do
10:
Calculate the CE loss L1CE ,L2CE of clean samples
in the current batch by Eq. 6.
11:
Calculate the similarity loss Ls of the current batch
by Eq. 10.
12:
Obtain the final losses L1 and L2 by Eq. 11.
13:
Use L1 and L2 to update the parameters of the two
SPTNets respectively.
14:
end for
15:
end if
16: end for
Output: Two trained SPTNets with θ1 and θ2
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we select four popular HSI datasets to
systematically analyze the effectiveness of the proposed

Fig. 3. Visualization of the Indian Pines dataset. (a) False-color composite
image. (b) Ground-truth map. The legend below images indicates which
category each color represents.

SPTNet and noise-tolerant learning algorithm. For convenience, we record our network and learning method as
SPTNet-NTLA in the subsequent description.
A. Datasets Description
The first one is the Indian Pines dataset, which was
acquired by the airborne visible/infrared imaging spectrometer
(AVIRIS) sensor over the Indian Pines test site in Northwest
Indiana. It consists of 145 × 145 pixels and 220 spectral bands
covering the wavelength range of 400–2500 nm. When we
use this dataset to study our model and training algorithm, its
spectral bands would be reduced to 200 to remove the impacts
of water-absorbing regions. There are 10 249 labeled pixels,
and they are divided into 16 semantic classes. The division
of training and testing sets can be found in Table I, which
is according to [58]. In addition, the false-color image and
ground-truth map of the Indian Pines dataset are shown in
Fig. 3. The second one is the University of Pavia dataset,
which was acquired by the reflective optics system imaging
spectrometer (ROSIS) sensor over Pavia in northern Italy.
It has 610 × 340 pixels and 103 spectral bands with a spatial
resolution of 1.3 m. Researchers annotate 42 776 pixels with
nine semantic classes. In the following experiments, following [58], we randomly use 3930 pixels as the training data,
and the rest of the labeled pixels are regarded as the testing
data. The exhaustive description can be found in Table II.
Also, Fig. 4 exhibits the false-color and ground-truth images.
The third one is the Houston dataset, which was acquired
by the ITRES CASI 1500 sensor in June 2012 over the
campus of the University of Houston and adjacent urban
areas in the United States. It encloses 349 × 1905 pixels
and 144 reflection bands with a wavelength range of 380–
1050 nm. The 15 029 pixels are labeled and partitioned into
15 land covers. As displayed in Table III, 150 categorized
pixels per class are selected as the training data, and the rest
are used as the testing data. This partition remains consistent
with [58]. Fig. 5 shows the false-color image and ground-truth
map. The last one is the Houston 2018 dataset. It was captured
by ITRES CASI 1500 at a ground sampling distance of 1 m
and published in the 2018 IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Society (GRSS) Data Fusion Contest. It contains
601 × 2384 pixels of 48 spectral bands. Among them, 504 856
pixels are labeled with 20 different semantics. As displayed

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE I
N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN THE T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET FOR E ACH
C LASS IN I NDIAN P INES

Fig. 5. Visualization of the University of Houston dataset. (a) False-color
composite image. (b) Ground-truth map. The legend below images indicates
which category each color represents.
TABLE III
N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN THE T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET FOR E ACH
C LASS IN H OUSTON

Fig. 4.
Visualization of the University of Pavia dataset. (a) False-color
composite image. (b) Ground-truth map. The legend below images indicates
which category each color represents.

TABLE II
N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN THE T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET FOR E ACH
C LASS IN U NIVERSITY OF PAVIA

Fig. 6. Visualization of the University of Houston 2018 dataset. (a) False–
color composite image. (b) Ground-truth map. The legend below images
indicates which category each color represents.

in Table IV, consistent with [70], 100 pixels of each class are
selected as training data, and the rest are used for testing. Fig. 6
exhibits the false-color and ground-truth images. To simulate
the noisy scenarios, we uniformly change labels from one class
to other classes with a noise rate r [56], [57], [59].

B. Experiment Settings
All experiments are conducted on a workstation with a
single GeForce RTX 2080 Ti of 11G memory with CUDA

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

5509719

TABLE IV

TABLE V

N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN THE T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET FOR E ACH
C LASS IN H OUSTON 2018

VALUES OF F REE PARAMETERS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

We select three assessment criteria to evaluate our SPTNetNTLA numerically [48], i.e., overall accuracy (OA), average
accuracy (AA), and kappa coefficient (K ). The numerical
results displayed in the following are the mean values of five
random experiments. Also, the standard deviation is counted
for reference. Data augmentation and label smoothing are used
in the training phase to ensure stability. In the inference stage,
we choose the last rather than the best model to complete the
prediction.
C. Classification Performance

11.0 and Intel Xeon Silver 4210 CPU. The compilation platform used in this article is PyTorch. The parameters of SPTNet
are initialized randomly. When we apply the noise-tolerant
learning algorithm to train SPTNets, the Adam optimizer is
selected to update SPTNets’ parameters. The training epochs
and the initial learning rate are 200 and 2e − 3, and the
learning rate decreases by 0.8× every ten epochs. The warmup cycle equals 20/20/30/30 for the Indian Pines, University
of Pavia, Houston, and Houston 2018 datasets. To study the
effectiveness of the proposed noise-tolerant algorithm, we first
select five popular HSI classification networks, including 3-D
CNN [71], spectral–spatial residual network (SSRN) [72],
SpectralFormer [20], local transformer with spatial partition
restore (SPRLT) [24], and spectral–spatial feature tokenization
transformer (SSFTT) [21]. Then, the usual learning manner
and our noise-tolerant learning algorithm are used to train them
separately under the noisy scenario. Their classification results
counted on the noisy Houston 2018 dataset are exhibited
in the below table. Our SPTNet’s results are also displayed
for reference. Note that the free parameters of the selected
networks are set according to the original literature, and the
experimental settings maintain consistency with the contents
mentioned in Section IV-B. Some free parameters should be
set in advance. For SPTNet, the free parameters are the patch
size s × s, the volume of attention heads h in the transformer
encoder, the dimension of the features c generated by SFE,
and the number of SPT n s . For the noise-tolerant learning
algorithm, the free parameters include the hyperparameter λs
for the final loss (11), the threshold τ in the data partition
scheme (5), and the number of superpixel number M. Apart
from c and n s that are fixed as 64 and 3 in our method, Table V
summarizes other empirically optimal values for four datasets.
Besides, their influence on our SPTNet-NTLA will be studied
in Section IV-E.

To demonstrate the effectiveness of SPTNet-NTLA,
we compare it with nine different methods, including
SCE [52], normalized cross entropy (NCE) [53], coteaching [63], 3-D CNN [71], RLPA [27], multiscale segmentationbased multilayer spectral–spatial graphs (MSSGs) [57],
DCRN [59], superpixel-guided sample selection neural network (S3Net) [58], and TCRL [60]. The first three methods
are developed for natural images, while the last six models
are HSI-oriented. The natural-scene-oriented methods are chosen, because their effectiveness has been proven in various
applications. By applying them to noisy HSI classification
tasks, robust comparison benchmarks can be provided to
evaluate SPTNet-NTLA’s performance comprehensively. Also,
the comparisons can be enriched in this case. All compared
methods are completed by ourselves using the released codes.
The free parameters of different methods are consistent with
the original literature, and the experimental settings are the
same as the contents mentioned in Sections IV-A and IV-B.
To deeply study our SPTNet-NTLA and the compared methods, we count the results when the noise rate r changes from
0.1 to 0.4.
1) Results on Indian Pines: The results of different methods
counted on the Indian Pines dataset at different noisy rates are
summarized in Table VI. By observing them, we can easily
find the following points.
1) First, the performance of all methods is acceptable when
r is small. When r increases, their behavior is weakened
to a certain degree. Especially, for SCE, NCE, coteaching, and 3-D CNN, the performance drops between
r = 0.1 and r = 0.4 are distinct, over approximately
10%. This is because the accumulated errors caused by
the noisy samples will reduce the model’s discrimination
in classification. Once the number of noisy samples
exceeds a certain threshold, the generated accumulated
errors would destroy the classification models.
2) Second, the performance of 3-D CNN is superior to
two machine learning-based algorithms (i.e., RLPA and

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE VI
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE I NDIAN P INES DATASET AT D IFFERENT N OISY R ATES

TABLE VII
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE U NIVERSITY OF PAVIA DATASET AT D IFFERENT N OISY R ATES

MSSG) due to the better feature extraction capacity
of the deep model when the noise is less. However,
since they distinguish noisy samples and accomplish
classification in a two-stage manner, RLPA and MSSG
outperform, as the noise rate rises. However, as the
independent combination of the noisy sample selection
scheme and the machine-learning-based classifier cannot
achieve satisfactory results, RLPA and MSSG’s behavior is weaker than three general-purpose methods, i.e.,
SCE, NCE, and coteaching. Nevertheless, as they do
not consider the specific characteristics of HSIs, their
performance is inferior to DCRN, S3Net, and TCRL.
Especially, in the case of a significant noisy rate, their
advantages are more pronounced.
3) Third, although DCRN, S3Net, and TCRL are stronger
than other models, our SPTNet-NTLA outperforms
them in all cases. When r = 0.1, the improvements achieved by SPTNet-NTLA in OA/AA/K are
0.94%/0.42%/1.09% (over DCRN), 2.31%/1.61%/2.68%
(over S3Net), and 0.38%/8.66%/0.43% (over TCRL).
When r = 0.4, the enhancements in OA/AA/K are
3.31%/2.12%/3.86% (over DCRN), 3.54%/3.10%/4.07%
(over S3Net), and 2.61%/16.42%/3.01% (over TCRL).
The reasons for these encouraging results are twofold.
On the one hand, the proposed SPTNet explores
the spectral information within HSIs from local and
global aspects. Besides, the redundant knowledge arising
from patch inputting is also considered in SPTNet.
On the other hand, the developed noise-tolerant learning

algorithm not only whittles down the impact of noisy
samples on SPTNet but also effectively helps SPTNet
mine the rich information hidden in all training data.
The above discussion illustrates the usefulness of SPTNetNTLA.
2) Results on University of Pavia: The classification performance of different methods on the University of Pavia dataset
is exhibited in Table VII. Similar to the investigation of the
Indian Pines dataset, the relatively weak models are PLPA,
MSSG, and 3-D CNN. Three natural-image-oriented models
perform better. However, their shortcomings are noticeable,
i.e., their behavior drops dramatically when r rises. The
performance of three HSI-oriented networks (DCRN, S3Net,
and TCRL) is superior to other compared methods. Our
SPTNet-NTLA is also the strongest one among all methods.
For instance, when r = 0.1, the enhancements of SPTNetNTLA in K value are 4.41% (over SCE), 0.22% (over NCE),
1.61% (over coteaching), 7.00% (over 3-D CNN), 11.97%
(over RLPA), 12.47% (over MSSG), 0.28% (over DCRN),
0.28% (over S3Net), and 0.18% (over TCRL). Besides, the
performance gaps (assessed by K value) between SPTNetNTLA and others are enlarged when r = 0.4, i.e., 36.23%
(over SCE), 5.95% (over NCE), 7.30% (over coteaching),
27.55% (over 3-D CNN), 12.41% (over RLPA), 12.71% (over
MSSG), 0.82% (over DCRN), 0.94% (over S3Net), and 0.44%
(over TCRL). The above analysis reflects that our method performs stably from another perspective. Regardless of whether
the noise rate is high or low, the performance of our SPTNetNTLA is positive.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

5509719

TABLE VIII
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE H OUSTON DATASET AT D IFFERENT N OISY R ATES

TABLE IX
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON THE H OUSTON 2018 DATASET AT D IFFERENT N OISY R ATES

3) Results on Houston: Table VIII lists the evaluation
results for various methods counted on the Houston dataset
at different noise levels. Similar to the conclusions obtained
on the Indian Pines and University of Pavia datasets,
the proposed SPTNet-NTLA is the best model among all
approaches. Taking OA values as an example, when r
varies from 0.1 to 0.4, the improvements achieved by
our method are 5.10%/13.25%/20.56%/29.93% (over SCE),
0.48%/1.80%/3.29%/5.35% (over NCE), 1.36%/4.30%/4.55%/
4.63% (over coteaching), 6.93%/11.99%/14.08%/17.99%
(over 3-D CNN), 8.47%/8.21%/7.60%/8.69% (over RLPA),
8.25%/7.98%/7.73%/8.57% (over MSSG), 1.41%/1.49%/
1.04%/2.33% (over DCRN), 2.50%/3.44%/4.12%/3.94% (over
S3Net), and 0.09%/0.06%/0.13%/0.07% (over TCRL). Also,
the standard deviations of our SPTNet-NTLA are the smallest
in most cases compared with other models. These encouraging
results demonstrate that SPTNet-NTLA is helpful in distinguishing the diverse land covers within HSI under the noisy
scenario.
4) Results on Houston 2018: The results of various
methods counted on Houston 2018 with different noise
rates are shown in Table IX. Similar to the conclusions
obtained on the other three datasets, although the accuracy of different methods decreases as the noise rate
increases, the proposed SPTNet-NTLA performs best. For
example, when r = 0.2, compared with the three better compared models (i.e., DCRN, S3Net, and TCRL),
the improvements obtained by SPTNet-NTLA in OA/AA/K
are 3.82%/0.48%/4.16% (over DCRN), 8.96%/2.41%/9.83%
(over S3Net), and 5.97%/32.68%/6.45% (over TCRL). When

r = 0.4, the enhancements in OA/AA/K are as high
as 9.50%/0.23%/9.96% (over DCRN), 16.74%/3.78%/17.22%
(over S3Net), and 10.72%/35.22%/11.21% (over TCRL).
These positive results further illustrate the usefulness of our
SPTNet-NTLA.
Apart from the numerical results discussed above, we also
display and study the classification maps obtained by different
models under four noise rates. The details can be found in the
Supplementary Material.
D. Ablation Analysis
The proposed SPTNet-NTLA involves two parts, including
a feature extraction backbone (i.e., SPTNet) and the corresponding training method (i.e., the noise-tolerant learning
algorithm). This section will inspect them deeply and separately. For clarity, the experiments in this section are conducted
under a noise ratio of 0.4 unless otherwise specified.
1) Effectiveness of SPTNet: To study SPTNet’s usefulness, we select five popular HSI classification networks and
compare the performance of SPTNet with these networks
in the noise-free scenario. The chosen networks are 3-D
CNN [71], SSRN [72], SpectralFormer [20], SPRLT [24],
and SSFTT [21]. Here, 3-D CNN and SSRN are CNNbased models, and SpectralFormer, SPRLT, and SSFTT are
transformer-based approaches. Their free parameters are kept
consistent with the original paper. The experimental settings
are aligned with the contents discussed in Section IV-B. Since
there is no noisy sample, the CE loss and the usual learning
manner are adopted to train different networks. Table X summarizes their performance on four HSI datasets. The results

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE X
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF SPTN ET AND OTHER F IVE HSI C LASSIFICATION N ETWORKS IN THE N OISE -F REE C ONDITION ,
C OUNTED ON F OUR HSI DATASETS

show that SPTNet outperforms the other five networks in all
cases. Taking the Indian Pines dataset as an example, the
improvements achieved by SPTNet in OA values are 2.17%
(over 3-D CNN), 0.52% (over SSRN), 2.28% (over SpectralFormer), 1.48% (over SPRLT), and 1.18% (over SSFTT). The
positive results indicate that our SPTNet is competitive in HSI
classification.
2) Importance of SPT: The core component of SPTNet is
SPT. To explore its utility, we replace it with the standard
transformer encoder, swin transformer [73], pyramid vision
transformer [74], and SPRLT [24] and construct SPTNet’s
variants. The new deep models are recorded as TNet, STNet,
PVTNet, and SPRLTNet for short. Their behavior on the
noisy HSI classification is summarized in Fig. 7. All networks are trained by the proposed noise-tolerant learning
algorithm, and the experimental settings are the same as the
contents mentioned in Section IV-B. We can find that SPTNet
achieves the best performance by observing these bars, which
implies our SPT is superior to the other transformer encoders.
Compared with the other four transformer encoders focusing
on mining global context within HSI, our SPT also reduces
the confused clues caused by HSI patches. Therefore, the
final noisy classification performance can be enhanced. Those
encouraging results demonstrate the advantages of SPT.
3) Significance of the Noise-Tolerant Learning Algorithm:
To investigate if our noise-tolerant learning algorithm works or
not, we apply it and the normal learning manner (with the CE
loss) to train SPTNet and the other five HSI classification networks (mentioned in Section IV-D1) separately under the noisy
scenario. Their classification results counted on four datasets
are exhibited in Table XI. Note that the free parameters of the
selected networks are set according to the original literature,
and the experimental settings maintain consistency with the
contents mentioned in Section IV-B.
From the observation of the results, we can find the following conclusion. First, compared with the normal learning
manner, the proposed noise-tolerant algorithm helps different
networks achieve stronger behavior when noisy samples exist.
Besides, the performance gaps between the same model with
different learning algorithms are distinct. These discoveries

Fig. 7. Classification performance of SPTNet and its four variants counted
on four HSI datasets when noise rate equals 0.4.

denote the usefulness of the proposed noise-tolerant learning
algorithm. Second, when we use the usual learning method,
the performance of SPTNet is relatively weak. Nevertheless,
when the proposed learning algorithm is applied, SPTNet
performs best among all networks. The reasons behind this
are as follows. When we use the usual learning manner, the
behavior of SPTNet is stronger than that of the other five
networks in the noise-free condition (see Section IV-D1). This
indicates that SPTNet can extract more information from HSIs
than other networks. Because of this characteristic, SPTNet
is more susceptible to obtaining erroneous clues when noisy
samples are present. As a result, its performance experiences
a noticeable decline. Once using our noise-tolerant learning
algorithm, the performance improvement of SPTNet is the
most significant, which implies the superiorities of our learning
algorithm and the potential of SPTNet in noisy classification
simultaneously.
4) Superiority of the Noise-Tolerant Learning Algorithm:
After discussing the significance of the proposed learning
algorithm, we will study its advantages in this section. To this
end, four noise-resistant algorithms are chosen to train SPTNet, including SCE loss (SCELoss) [52], noise-tolerant deep
neighbor embedding (NTDEN) [75], NCE loss and RCE loss

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

5509719

TABLE XI
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF VARIOUS N ETWORKS BASED ON THE N ORMAL T RAINING M ANNER AND O UR N OISE -T OLERANT A LGORITHM . T HE
R ESULTS A RE C OUNTED ON F OUR HSI DATASETS U NDER THE N OISY R ATE OF 0.4

(NRLoss) [59], and sample selection and sample correction
(SSSC) [58]. The trained SPTNets’ performance for noisy
HSI classification is summarized in Table XII. The results of
SPTNet trained by our learning algorithm are also exhibited
for reference. It is not difficult to find that SPTNet’s behavior
is the strongest when our learning algorithm is used. This is
because our algorithm combines the cross-selection strategy
and similarity loss, which facilitates the discovery of clean
samples and fully uses the entire sample to guarantee the
classification result.
5) Contributions of Components in the Noise-Tolerant
Learning Algorithm: Our algorithm encompasses three components, i.e., the data partition scheme, cotraining mechanism,
and similarity regularization. We individually add them to a
“Base” training method to study their contributions. Here,
“Base” means we use training data to train SPTNet with the
CE loss without considering the noisy samples. The results
of SPTNets trained by different algorithms are summarized
in Table XIII. Not surprisingly, SPTNet trained by “Base”
performs worst due to the adverse impacts of noisy samples.
When we add the data partition scheme, SPTNet’s behavior
becomes stronger, which implies the importance of the data
partition scheme. After including the cotraining mechanism,
the performance of SPTNet is enhanced to a certain degree.
This indicates that the selected clean samples are more credible
under the cotraining paradigm. Once the similarity regularization is added, SPTNet performs best on different HSIs. This
is owing to the similarity regularization that helps SPTNet
explore profitable information from both clean and noisy
samples without considering the manual labels. The above
ablation studies demonstrate that all components of the noisetolerant learning algorithm play an irreplaceable role of their
own.
E. Impacts of Free Parameters
As mentioned in Section IV-B, there are seven free parameters, including the patch size s × s, the volume of attention

heads h in the transformer encoder, the dimension of the
features c in SFE, the number of SPT n s , the hyperparameter
λs for the final loss (11), the threshold τ in the data partition
scheme (5), and the number of superpixels M. In this section,
we will analyze their influence by changing their values. Note
that only one parameter will be tuned each time, and other
parameters are set according to Table V. For clarity, we fix
r = 0.4 and select OA as the assessment criterion.
1) Analysis of Patch Size: To study the impact of patch
size s × s on our method, we change its values at a range
of [7 × 7, 15 × 15]. The performance of different SPTNetNTLAs with various s ×s counted on four datasets is shown in
Figs. 8(a), 9(a), 10(a), and 11(a). By observing them, it is easy
for us to find that the behavior of SPTNet-NTLAs becomes
stronger first and then shifts weaker. For the first three datasets,
their peaks occur at 9 × 9. For Houston 2018, its peak appears
at 13 × 13. This is because of the following: 1) the contents
within small patches are not rich enough to train our model and
2) large patches contain more redundant messages that would
confuse the proposed model. Here, large and small are relative
concepts defined based on image size. Therefore, we suggest
that the suitable sizes of HSI patches are 13 × 13 (Houston
2018) and 9 × 9 (others).
2) Study of the Number of Attention Heads: In this section,
we set h equal to 2, 4, 8, and 16, respectively, to observe its
impact. The results counted on four datasets are depicted in
Figs. 8(b), 9(b), 10(b), and 11(b). The OA values of SPTNetNTLA become larger when h increases from 2 to 8. Then, they
slightly decrease when h changes from 8 to 16. Fortunately, the
SPTNet-NTLA’s behavior does not vary significantly. In other
words, SPTNet-NTLA is not sensitive to h. Considering the
trade-off between the performance and time costs, we suggest
h = 8.
3) Study of the Dimension of the Features in the SFE: As
mentioned in Section III-B, we fix the dimension of outputs
of SFE as 64. In this section, we change this value from 16 to
128 to study its impact on classification. The results of

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE XII
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF SPTN ET C OMBINED W ITH D IFFERENT N OISE -R ESISTANT A LGORITHMS AND O UR N OISE -T OLERANT A LGORITHM
ON F OUR HSI DATASETS AT A N OISE R ATE OF 0.4

TABLE XIII
R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDIES OF VARIOUS PARTS OF O UR N OISE -T OLERANT A LGORITHM ON F OUR DATASETS

SPTNets with different SFE outputs counted on four datasets
are shown in Figs. 8(c), 9(c), 10(c), and 11(c). By observation,
we can see that the trend of curves is to increase first and
then decrease. Also, the pinnacle values appear when the
dimension of SFE outputs is equal to 64 in all cases. The
reasons behind this can be summarized as follows. When
the feature dimension is small, the learned features cannot
express complex contents within HSIs. However, when the
feature dimension is large, the obtained features contain much
more useless clues that harm the downstream classification.
Therefore, we suggest that the output feature dimension of
SFE is 64.
4) Study of the Number of SPT: To investigate the impact
of the number of SPT n s on SPTNet performance, we vary
the number of SPT from 1 to 4 and observe the behavior
of SPTNet. The results counted on four datasets are shown

in Figs. 8(d), 9(d), 10(d), and 11(d). By observing those
curves, we can find that the OA values first increase and
then decrease as the number of SPT increases. Also, the peak
values appear when the number of SPT equals 3. This is
because when there are fewer SPTs, the model’s ability to
capture spatial information is insufficient, resulting in less
satisfactory classification results. However, when there are too
many SPTs, the model is prone to overfitting, which, in turn,
limits its classification effectiveness. Taking all factors into
consideration, we recommend using three SPTs.
5) Impact of the Hyperparameter: To analyze the influence
of λs on our model, we vary its value from 0.1 to 0.9 with an
interval of 0.1. The OA values of different SPTNet-NTLAs are
summarized in Figs. 8(e), 9(e), 10(e), and 11(e). For the Indian
Pines dataset, SPTNet-NTLA’s performance improves sharply
when λs varies from 0.1 to 0.2, remains when λs increases

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

5509719

Fig. 8. Influence of different free parameters on our SPTNet-NTLA. The OA curves are counted on the Indian Pines dataset. (a) s × s. (b) h. (c) c. (d) n s .
(e) λs . (f) τ . (g) M.

Fig. 9. Influence of different free parameters on our SPTNet-NTLA. The OA curves are counted on the University of Pavia dataset. (a) s × s. (b) h. (c) c.
(d) n s . (e) λs . (f) τ . (g) M.

Fig. 10. Influence of different free parameters on our SPTNet-NTLA. The OA curves are counted on the Houston dataset. (a) s × s. (b) h. (c) c. (d) n s .
(e) λs . (f) τ . (g) M.

from 0.2 to 0.7, and drops when λs ≥ 0.7. Besides, the
peak OA value appears at λs = 0.2. The above investigation
means that CE loss dominates the final classification, and
the similarity loss provides important assistance. For the

University of Pavia dataset, the SPTNet-NTLA’s performance
shows an upward trend with λs rises, and the best SPTNetNTLA appears at λs = 0.9. This means the function of
the similarity loss is significant. A similar conclusion can

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 11. Influence of different free parameters on our SPTNet-NTLA. The OA curves are counted on the Houston 2018 dataset. (a) s × s. (b) h. (c) c. (d) n s .
(e) λs . (f) τ . (g) M.

be obtained for the Houston and Houston 2018 datasets, i.e.,
larger λs better results. Besides, the highest OA of these two
HSIs emerges at λs = 0.8. In summary, the above observations
denote that two terms in the final loss (11) are complementary
and indispensable to each other.
6) Effect of the Threshold: This parameter determines the
volume of the clean samples. A smaller τ means more clean
samples would be used to calculate the CE loss (6). To study
its effect, we tune it in a range of [0.1, 0.9]. The OA curves
of SPTNet-NTLAs with different τ values counted on four
datasets are shown in Figs. 8(f), 9(f), 10(f), and 11(f). For
the Indian Pines dataset, the OA values of SPTNet-NTLAs
fluctuate between 96% and 97%, and the best value appears
at τ = 0.3. For the University of Pavia and Houston datasets,
the OA values of various SPTNet-NTLAs are concentrated
around 99.4% and 96%, respectively. Also, the best values
for these two datasets appear at τ = 0.5. For the Houston
2018 dataset, the best OA value of SPTNet-NTLAs occurs at
τ = 0.7. The above observations imply that the impacts of
τ on SPTNet-NTLA are small for the University of Pavia
and Houston datasets but are relatively big for the Indian
Pines and Houston 2018 datasets. This is mainly due to the
characteristics of the data itself. Compared with the other three
datasets, the size of the Indian Pines dataset is relatively small,
as well as the scale of the training set. In addition to the class
imbalance problem, SPTNet requires more labeled samples
to learn meaningful information. Consequently, the optimal
τ is small, so more labeled samples can be selected as the
clean data. The Houston 2018 dataset is the largest among the
four HSIs, and its categories are the richest. In this case, the
noisy labels’ influence would be significant. Therefore, it is
reasonable for SPTNet-NTLA to use a more strict selection
strategy (i.e., a larger τ value). For the other two datasets,
since the scale of labeled samples is large, the class imbalance
issue is not prominent, and the categories are not too complex,
the most proper τ emerges at 0.5.
7) Influence of the Numbers of Superpixels: The number
of superpixels M is crucial for the similarity regularization proposed in Section III-C. When M is small, the

obtained homogeneous regions will contain too many pixels, which harms establishing similar pixel pairs. When M
is large, the volume of pixels within homogeneous regions
would be small. The constructed similar pixel pairs cannot
provide enough clues for mining the similarity relations.
Considering the differences in sizes among different datasets,
we change M from 200 to 1200 for the Indian Pines dataset,
from 5000 to 20 000 for the University of Pavia dataset,
from 6000 to 26 000 for the Houston dataset, and from
10 000 to 35 000 for the Houston 2018 dataset. In this way,
each superpixel will contain approximately 10–40 pixels. The
different SPTNet-NTLAs’ OA values counted on four datasets
are exhibited in Figs. 8(g), 9(g), 10(g), and 11(g). From
the observation of these OA curves, we can find that their
changes are relatively gradual, and the optimal number of
superpixels for the four datasets is 800, 17 000, 18 000, and
30 000, respectively. The above inspection implies that the
proper volume of pixels in a homogeneous region is around
20–30.
F. Complexity Analysis
In this section, we study the efficiency of the proposed
SPTNet-NTLA from the following three points. First, the
model size of SPTNet is counted and exhibited in Table XIV.
The deep-learning-based compared models’ sizes are also
counted for reference. By comparison, we can observe that the
proposed SPTNet is close to the lightest, whose size is as small
as 0.68 MB. This is attributed to the powerful informationlearning ability of SPT, which ensures that we do not need
more layers to capture messages hidden in HSIs. Besides,
introducing spatial pooling further reduces the SPTNet’s size
by removing redundant information. Second, the training times
of different methods counted on the Indian Pines dataset are
summarized in Table XIV. The most time-consuming model
is S3Net, and the most time-saving method is DCRN. The
training time of our SPTNet-NTLA is slightly longer than most
of the models. The main reason is that we adopt the cotraining idea and train two SPTNets simultaneously. Fortunately,
once the SPTNets are trained by the noise-tolerant learning

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

TABLE XIV
M ODEL S IZE , T RAINING T IME , AND I NFERENCE T IME OF E ACH
A LGORITHM ON THE I NDIAN P INES DATASET

algorithm, SPTNet-NTLA’s inference time is the shortest (see
the last column of Table XIV). The above contents illustrate
that our SPTNet-NTLA is a light and efficient noisy HSI
classification method.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes a simple yet effective network SPTNet
and a noise-tolerant learning algorithm for the HSI classification task with noisy labels. SPTNet first analyzes the
spectral information within HSIs by combining 2-D CNN
and 3-D CNN. Then, a new SPT is developed based on the
standard transformer to extract global spatial contexts hidden
in HSIs and remove confusing information caused by patch
input. After weaving the above techniques into an end-to-end
framework, the complex contents of HSIs can be thoroughly
mined. For the noise-tolerant learning algorithm, a data partition scheme is designed to divide the training data into clean
and noisy sets. Also, the cotraining mechanism is adopted to
ensure the credibility of selected samples. Then, the clean
samples are used to train SPTNets with classification loss.
Meanwhile, considering that the knowledge of noisy samples
is also helpful for understanding HSIs’ land covers, we develop
a similarity regularization to mine the messages covered by
noisy samples. Finally, SPTNets can be trained under the
noisy scenario by jointly optimizing the classification and
similarity losses. Encouraging experimental results counted
on four public HSI datasets validate the effectiveness of our
proposed methods on the noisy HSI classification.
In real scenarios, noisy samples’ distributions are more complex, which may be feature-dependent or category-dependent.
Our future work is to conquer these challenges and ensure
classification performance.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Peng et al., “Low-rank and sparse representation for hyperspectral
image processing: A review,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 10–43, Mar. 2022.
[2] R. Thoreau, V. Achard, L. Risser, B. Berthelot, and X. Briottet,
“Active learning for hyperspectral image classification: A comparative
review,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 256–278,
Sep. 2022.
[3] X. Li et al., “Multi-view learning for hyperspectral image classification: An overview,” Neurocomputing, vol. 500, pp. 499–517,
Aug. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0925231222006762
[4] A. Belwalkar, T. Poblete, A. Longmire, A. Hornero, R. HernandezClemente, and P. Zarco-Tejada, “Evaluation of SIF retrievals from
narrow-band and sub-nanometer airborne hyperspectral imagers flown in
tandem: Modelling and validation in the context of plant phenotyping,”
Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 273, May 2022, Art. no. 112986.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0034425722001006

5509719

[5] S. Marconi et al., “Continental-scale hyperspectral tree species
classification in the United States national ecological observatory
network,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 282, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 113264.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0034425722003704
[6] P. Ghamisi et al., “New frontiers in spectral–spatial hyperspectral image
classification: The latest advances based on mathematical morphology,
Markov random fields, segmentation, sparse representation, and deep
learning,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 10–43,
Sep. 2018.
[7] Y. Zhang, W. Li, W. Sun, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Single-source domain
expansion network for cross-scene hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1498–1512, 2023.
[8] M. Ahmad et al., “Hyperspectral image classification-traditional to deep
models: A survey for future prospects,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 968–999, 2022.
[9] L. He, J. Li, C. Liu, and S. Li, “Recent advances on spectral–spatial
hyperspectral image classification: An overview and new guidelines,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1579–1597,
Mar. 2018.
[10] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y. Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classification: An overview,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709,
Sep. 2019.
[11] M. E. Paoletti, J. M. Haut, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Deep learning
classifiers for hyperspectral imaging: A review,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 158, pp. 279–317, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924271619302187
[12] S. Dong, P. Wang, and K. Abbas, “A survey on deep learning
and its applications,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, May 2021,
Art. no. 100379. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1574013721000198
[13] W. Wang, Q. Lai, H. Fu, J. Shen, H. Ling, and R. Yang, “Salient object
detection in the deep learning era: An in-depth survey,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 3239–3259, Jun. 2022.
[14] B. Liu, A. Yu, X. Yu, R. Wang, K. Gao, and W. Guo, “Deep multiview
learning for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 7758–7772, Sep. 2021.
[15] M. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral and
LiDAR data classification based on structural optimization transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 3153–3164, May 2023.
[16] C. Wang et al., “A review of deep learning used in the hyperspectral
image analysis for agriculture,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 54, no. 7,
pp. 5205–5253, Oct. 2021.
[17] S. Khan, M. Naseer, M. Hayat, S. W. Zamir, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah,
“Transformers in vision: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 1–41, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1145/3505244.
[18] K. Han et al., “A survey on vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–110, Jan. 2023.
[19] J. He, L. Zhao, H. Yang, M. Zhang, and W. Li, “HSI-BERT: Hyperspectral image classification using the bidirectional encoder representation
from transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1,
pp. 165–178, Jan. 2020.
[20] D. Hong et al., “SpectralFormer: Rethinking hyperspectral image classification with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5518615.
[21] L. Sun, G. Zhao, Y. Zheng, and Z. Wu, “Spectral–spatial feature
tokenization transformer for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5522214.
[22] Y. Liu, J. Hu, X. Kang, J. Luo, and S. Fan, “Interactformer: Interactive
transformer and CNN for hyperspectral image super-resolution,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5531715.
[23] X. Xue, H. Zhang, B. Fang, Z. Bai, and Y. Li, “Grafting transformer on
automatically designed convolutional neural network for hyperspectral
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5531116.
[24] Z. Xue, Q. Xu, and M. Zhang, “Local transformer with spatial partition
restore for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 4307–4325, 2022.
[25] B. Tu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Liao, and J. Peng, “Noisy labels detection
in hyperspectral image via class-dependent collaborative representation,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 12,
pp. 5076–5085, Dec. 2019.
[26] L. Wang and C. Zhao, Hyperspectral Image Processing. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5509719

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

[27] J. Jiang, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Chen, and X. Liu, “Hyperspectral image
classification in the presence of noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 851–865, Feb. 2019.
[28] B. Tu, X. Zhang, X. Kang, J. Wang, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Spatial
density peak clustering for hyperspectral image classification with
noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 7,
pp. 5085–5097, Jul. 2019.
[29] S. K. Roy, D. Hong, P. Kar, X. Wu, X. Liu, and D. Zhao, “Lightweight
heterogeneous kernel convolution for hyperspectral image classification
with noisy labels,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5,
2022.
[30] M. Zhang, M. Gong, H. He, and S. Zhu, “Symmetric all convolutional
neural-network-based unsupervised feature extraction for hyperspectral images classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 5,
pp. 2981–2993, May 2022.
[31] Z. Zheng, Y. Zhong, A. Ma, and L. Zhang, “FPGA: Fast patch-free
global learning framework for fully end-to-end hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 8,
pp. 5612–5626, Aug. 2020.
[32] M. Zhu, J. Fan, Q. Yang, and T. Chen, “SC-EADNet: A self-supervised
contrastive efficient asymmetric dilated network for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5519517.
[33] S. Wang, B. Du, D. Zhang, and F. Wan, “Adversarial prototype learning
for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511918.
[34] X. Tang et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on 3-D
octave convolution with spatial–spectral attention network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2430–2447, Mar. 2021.
[35] Z. Lv, X.-M. Dong, J. Peng, and W. Sun, “ESSINet: Efficient spatial–
spectral interaction network for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5525715.
[36] Y. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised multiscale dynamic graph convolution network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Oct. 21, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3212985.
[37] S. Zhang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and S. Jia, “Unsupervised spatial–spectral
CNN-based feature learning for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5524617.
[38] X. Tang, M. Li, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “EMTCAL:
Efficient multiscale transformer and cross-level attention learning for
remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5626915.
[39] D. Wang et al., “Advancing plain vision transformer toward remote
sensing foundation model,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5607315.
[40] H. Chen, G. Yang, and H. Zhang, “Hider: A hyperspectral image
denoising transformer with spatial–spectral constraints for hybrid noise
removal,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Oct. 31,
2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3215751.
[41] R. Song, Y. Feng, W. Cheng, Z. Mu, and X. Wang, “BS2T: Bottleneck spatial–spectral transformer for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5532117.
[42] S. Mei, C. Song, M. Ma, and F. Xu, “Hyperspectral image classification using group-aware hierarchical transformer,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5539014.
[43] J. Bai et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on multibranch
attention transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5535317.
[44] H. Yu, Z. Xu, K. Zheng, D. Hong, H. Yang, and M. Song, “MSTNet:
A multilevel spectral–spatial transformer network for hyperspectral
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5532513.
[45] X. Zhang, Y. Su, L. Gao, L. Bruzzone, X. Gu, and Q. Tian,
“A lightweight transformer network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5517617.
[46] C. Zhao et al., “Hyperspectral image classification with multi-attention
transformer and adaptive superpixel segmentation-based active learning,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 3606–3621, 2023.
[47] J. Li, Y. Wong, Q. Zhao, and M. S. Kankanhalli, “Learning to learn
from noisy labeled data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 5046–5054.
[48] H. Song, M. Kim, D. Park, Y. Shin, and J.-G. Lee, “Learning from noisy
labels with deep neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8135–8153, Nov. 2023.

[49] J. Shu et al., “Meta-weight-net: Learning an explicit mapping
for sample weighting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), vol. 32, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. d’Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds. Red Hook, NY, USA:
Curran, 2019, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/e58cc5ca94270acaceed13bc82dfedf7Paper.pdf
[50] H. Wei, L. Feng, X. Chen, and B. An, “Combating noisy labels by
agreement: A joint training method with co-regularization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 13723–13732.
[51] N. Karim, M. N. Rizve, N. Rahnavard, A. Mian, and M. Shah, “UNICON: Combating label noise through uniform selection and contrastive
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9666–9676.
[52] Y. Wang, X. Ma, Z. Chen, Y. Luo, J. Yi, and J. Bailey, “Symmetric
cross entropy for robust learning with noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 322–330.
[53] X. Ma, H. Huang, Y. Wang, S. Romano, S. Erfani, and J. Bailey,
“Normalized loss functions for deep learning with noisy labels,”
in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, H. D. III
and A. Singh, Eds. Jul. 2020, pp. 6543–6553. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/ma20c.html
[54] A. Iscen, J. Valmadre, A. Arnab, and C. Schmid, “Learning with neighbor consistency for noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 4662–4671.
[55] B. Tu, X. Zhang, X. Kang, G. Zhang, and S. Li, “Density peak-based
noisy label detection for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1573–1584, Mar. 2019.
[56] B. Tu, C. Zhou, X. Liao, Z. Xu, Y. Peng, and X. Ou, “Hierarchical
structure-based noisy labels detection for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 13,
pp. 2183–2199, 2020.
[57] J. Jiang, J. Ma, and X. Liu, “Multilayer spectral–spatial graphs for label
noisy robust hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 839–852, Feb. 2022.
[58] H. Xu, H. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A superpixel guided sample selection neural network for handling noisy labels in hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11,
pp. 9486–9503, Nov. 2021.
[59] Y. Xu et al., “Dual-channel residual network for hyperspectral image
classification with noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5502511.
[60] X. Zhang, S. Yang, Z. Feng, L. Song, Y. Wei, and L. Jiao, “Triple
contrastive representation learning for hyperspectral image classification
with noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 500116.
[61] H. Liu, W. Li, X.-G. Xia, M. Zhang, C.-Z. Gao, and R. Tao, “Central
attention network for hyperspectral imagery classification,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8989–9003, Nov. 2023.
[62] X. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Zhu, X. Tang, J. Feng, and L. Jiao, “Spatial pooling graph convolutional network for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5521315.
[63] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks
with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), vol. 31, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran,
2018, pp. 1–11. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_files/paper/2018/file/a19744e268754fb0148b017647355b7bPaper.pdf
[64] D. Reynolds, Gaussian Mixture Models. Boston, MA, USA: Springer,
2009, pp. 659–663, doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_196.
[65] J. Li, R. Socher, and S. C. Hoi, “DivideMix: Learning with noisy labels
as semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2020,
pp. 1–14.
[66] S. Zhao, L. Zhou, W. Wang, D. Cai, T. L. Lam, and Y. Xu, “Toward
better accuracy-efficiency trade-offs: Divide and co-training,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 5869–5880, 2022.
[67] S. Li, X. Xia, S. Ge, and T. Liu, “Selective-supervised contrastive
learning with noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 316–325.
[68] S. Wu et al., “Class2simi: A noise reduction perspective on learning with
noisy labels,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, M. Meila
and T. Zhang, Eds. Jul. 2021, pp. 11285–11295. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/wu21f.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: SPTNet AND NOISE-TOLERANT LEARNING FOR NOISY HSI CLASSIFICATION

[69] R. Achanta, A. Shaji, K. Smith, A. Lucchi, P. Fua, and S. Süsstrunk,
“SLIC superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 2274–2282,
Nov. 2012.
[70] J. Yang, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “From center to surrounding: An interactive learning framework for hyperspectral image classification,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 197, pp. 145–166, Mar. 2023.
[71] Y. Chen, H. Jiang, C. Li, X. Jia, and P. Ghamisi, “Deep feature extraction and classification of hyperspectral images based on convolutional
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 6232–6251, Oct. 2016.
[72] Z. Zhong, J. Li, Z. Luo, and M. Chapman, “Spectral–spatial residual
network for hyperspectral image classification: A 3-D deep learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 2,
pp. 847–858, Feb. 2018.
[73] Z. Liu et al., “Swin Transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.
[74] W. Wang et al., “Pyramid vision transformer: A versatile backbone for
dense prediction without convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 548–558.
[75] J. Kang, R. Fernandez-Beltran, X. Kang, J. Ni, and A. Plaza, “Noisetolerant deep neighborhood embedding for remotely sensed images with
label noise,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 14, pp. 2551–2562, 2021.
Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include computational
intelligence and image understanding.

Yizhou Zou received the B.E. degree in intelligent science and technology from Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in computer science and technology
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education.
His research interests include image understanding, hyperspectral image classification, and deep
learning.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively,
all in electronic circuit and system.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery at the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently a Full Professor with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. His
research interests include remote sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remote
sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, please refer
to https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/.

5509719

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is currently a Professor with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine
learning, and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.

Fang Liu (Member, IEEE) was born in China in
1990. She received the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Henan University,
Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in
intelligent information processing from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently an Associate Professor with
the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. Her research interests include
deep learning, object detection, polarimetric synthetic aperture radar (SAR) image classification, and
change detection.

Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding, Ministry of Education. He has authored or coauthored
more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include signal and
image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet theory,
natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is a member of the IEEE Xi’an Section Executive Committee and
an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:54:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

