IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5510319

SpiralMamba: Spatial–Spectral Complementary
Mamba With Spatial Spiral Scan for
Hyperspectral Image Classification
Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yuexi Yao, Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yuqun Yang, Bo Wang,
and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Hyperspectral image (HSI) classification is crucial in the remote sensing (RS) community. In recent years,
Transformers have been popular in this field due to their
global information modeling capabilities. However, the quadratic
complexity limits their performance under limited computational
resources. Fortunately, a selective structured state space model
(SSM) named Mamba emerges. Like Transformer, it is good at
modeling the long-distance relationships hidden in the pending
data. Unlike Transformer, its complexity remains at a linear level.
Therefore, a growing number of studies have been proposed to
explore the usefulness of Mamba in HSI classification. Nevertheless, most of them only apply Mamba to HSIs directly but do not
consider the inherent characteristics of HSIs properly. To exploit
the potential of Mamba in HSI classification deeply, this article
presents a new spatial–spectral complementary Mamba with a
spatial spiral scan named SpiralMamba. It mainly encloses three
main components: a spatial Mamba encoder (SpaME), a spectral
Mamba encoder (SpeME), and a spatial–spectral complementary
fusion module (SSCFM). SpaME focuses on understanding the
spatial context within HSIs. To this end, instead of the common
scanning, a spatial spiral scan strategy is introduced to address
the sequence transformation of noncausal HSIs. SpeME aims to
comprehensively extract valuable spectral features from HSIs.
To achieve this goal, besides developing a spectral bidirectional
scan strategy, a multilayer convolution (MLC) is also incorporated to capture local variations within spectral tokens. SSCFM
concentrates on building the complex connections between spatial and spectral features and fusing them. For this purpose,
a relationship learning block (RLB) and a threshold enhancement mechanism (TEM) are developed. Positive experimental
results counted on three public HSI datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of SpiralMamba. Our source codes are available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/Hyperspectral-ImagesClassification/tree/main/SpiralMamba
Received 11 December 2024; revised 17 March 2025; accepted 2 April
2025. Date of publication 10 April 2025; date of current version 18 April
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62171332 and Grant 62276197, in part
by the Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi under Grant
2024GX-YBXM-125, in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Program
of Shaanxi under Grant 2024JC-YBMS-472, and in part by the Shaanxi
Province Innovation Capability Support Plan under Grant 2023-CX-TD-09.
(Corresponding author: Xu Tang.)
Xu Tang, Yuexi Yao, Jingjing Ma, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710126, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com).
Yuqun Yang and Bo Wang are with the Institute of Medical Equipment
Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3559137

Index Terms— Hyperspectral image (HSI) classification, selective structured state space model (SSM) (Mamba).

I. I NTRODUCTION

H

YPERSPECTRAL image (HSI) processing is always
a hot topic in the remote sensing (RS) community.
Unlike the regular RS products, HSIs contain rich and nearly
continuous spectral information [1], [2]. They consist of hundreds of narrow bands with different manifestations on diverse
objects [3]. Therefore, HSIs can reflect the physical properties
of objects at a fine-grained level and provide richer information
for Earth observation [4], [5]. Owing to this property, HSIs
can be applied to a wide range of applications, such as
agricultural monitoring [6], [7], [8], urban planning [9], [10],
environmental monitoring [11], [12], mineral exploration [13],
[14], and plants classification [15], [16], [17]. In view of the
broad application of HSI, designing a suitable and accurate
HSI classification model remains a primary and urgent task.
HSI classification aims to assign the semantic labels to
pixels according to their spectral characteristics and spatial
structure [18], [19]. In the current deep era, the popular HSI
classification methods are mainly developed based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20] and Transformer [21].
The CNN-based methods [22], [23], [24], [25], [26] are good
at capturing the local information from HSIs due to their
fixed receptive fields. Along with other successful techniques,
such as visual attention [27], they achieve good performance.
However, since CNN-based approaches cannot fully explore
the long-range dependencies hidden in HSIs, their behavior is
not as good as expected. In this case, Transformer-based methods [28], [29], [30], [31], [32] stand out for their advantages.
With the strong capacities of Transformer in global knowledge
modeling, they enhance the HSI classification results to a
new degree. Considering the inherent benefits of CNNs and
Transformers, researchers intend to combine them for HSI
classification [33], [34], [35], [36], [37], [38]. This way, the
local and global clues within HSIs can be analyzed thoroughly to ensure the precision of the final classification maps.
Although the above methods perform well, they are confronted
with an issue, i.e., the quadratic computational complexity
of Transformers caused by the self-attention mechanism [39].

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Due to this shortcoming, its generalization in practical applications is limited. Therefore, there is a need to develop an HSI
classification method that can discover valuable HSIs clues
with a relatively low computational complexity.
Recently, with the emergence and popularity of the selective
structured state space model (SSM) (Mamba) [39], [40],
a favorable solution to the need mentioned above has become
available. Like Transformers, Mamba has strong global modeling capabilities. Unlike Transformers, Mamba’s computational
complexity stays at the linear level. Especially when vision
Mamba [41], [42] comes out, many new Mamba-based models
have been proposed and perform well in various computer
vision and RS tasks, such as image classification [43], [44],
semantic segmentation [45], [46], change detection [47], [48],
and so on [49], [50]. Mamba has also attracted scholars in
HSI classification [51], [52], [53], [54], [55], [56]. Although
their behavior is good, there is still room for improvement.
The first challenge is how to convert noncausal HSIs into
the sequence for the SSM [39] reasonably. The Mamba-based
approaches in [51], [54], [57], [58], [59], and [60] usually
leverage simple flatten (sequential scan) or cross scan [42]
to achieve HSIs’ sequence transformation. Although feasible,
they do not consider the spatial characteristics of HSI patches
that expand around the center pixel, leading to information
discontinuity at the edges. As a result, some positional information would be lost, and spatial clues could not be accurately
expressed. Second, there is insufficient local modeling within
the spectral tokens. Current methods [54], [55], [57], [58]
focus on extracting global clues among spectral tokens using
Mamba. However, they neglect local correlations within these
tokens. Since adjacent features within spectral tokens are
often more correlated, the lack of local perception results
in incomplete spectral feature extraction. Third, independent
spatial/spectral learning or inadequate feature-level fusion.
Some Mamba-based methods [53], [56], [57] explore spatial or
spectral messages from HSIs separately, limiting their ability
to understand the HSI data fully. Even some methods [55],
[58], [59] take spatial and spectral aspects at the same time,
their fusion strategies are often insufficient, which lack deep
relational modeling and are sensitive to anomalous conditions,
e.g., different spectra for the same material and the same
spectra for different materials.
To overcome the challenges mentioned above, we propose
a spatial–spectral complementary Mamba with spatial spiral
scan for HSI classification named SpiralMamba. It mainly
consists of a spatial Mamba encoder (SpaME), a spectral
Mamba encoder (SpeME), and a spatial–spectral complementary fusion module (SSCFM). First, under the Mamba
framework, we tailor a spatial spiral scan strategy to maintain
the spatial structure relative to the center pixel as much as
possible. Therefore, SpaME can reduce the information loss in
the sequence transition and better understand spatial information. Second, SpeME is introduced to strengthen SpiralMamba
from the spectral perspective. In SpeME, rather than multilayer
perceptron (MLP), we combine Mamba with multilayer convolution (MLC) to complete the global information interaction
and the local feature extraction. This way, the spectral clues
hidden in HSIs can be fully and appropriately interpreted.

Third, SSCFM is developed to ensure that SpiralMamba can
adequately fuse the spatial and spectral features. SSCFM
involves a relationship learning block (RLB) and a threshold
enhancement mechanism (TEM), which aim to learn the
complex relationships between different features and refine the
learned relationship weights. The spatial and spectral features
can be integrated accordingly in this progressive learning and
optimization manner. It is important to note that the choice
of Mamba rather than Transformer for HSIs is due not only
to its lower computational complexity but also to its inherent
inductive bias as a sequence model, which is more suitable
for investigating continuous spectral sequences. What is more,
since Mamba selectively explores the relationships between
the current and historical tokens instead of all tokens [42]
and does not have complex attention calculations, it has a
lower risk of overfitting on HSIs with limited sample and high
spectral dimensions.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
1) A new HSI classification network named SpiralMamba,
which has a dual-branch architecture, is proposed to
comprehensively capture the spatial–spectral information hidden in HSIs. The learned features are then
integrated through a delicately designed fusion module. This spatial–spectral complementary cooperation
enables the accuracy of the results.
2) In the spatial branch, the spatial spiral scan strategy
is developed considering the characteristics of HSIs.
Unlike traditional flatten or cross scan, the spiral scan
preserves spatial continuity and positional information
relative to the center pixel during the sequence transformation. It emphasizes the importance of the center pixel,
allowing Mamba to capture spatial information better.
3) Adequate local modeling within spectral tokens in the
spectral branch. The introduction of MLC in SpeME
enhances local perceptual ability within spectral tokens
by leveraging convolutions to capture internal correlations. This local modeling within the token complements
Mamba’s global information extraction among spectral
tokens, leading to a more comprehensive representation
of spectral features.
4) Accurate and elaborated feature-level fusion. Unlike
simple fusion operations, e.g., addition or concatenation,
SSCFM uses RLB to fully model the hidden relationships between spatial and spectral features and applies
TEM to refine feature weights further, enhancing reliable
features while filtering out unreliable ones to avoid
inaccurate fusion.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section II
reviews existing HSI classification methods, including nonMamba- and Mamba-based approaches. Section III explains
SpiralMamba in detail. The experiments and discussion are
exhibited in Section IV. Finally, Section V offers a brief
conclusion.
II. R ELATED W ORK
For clarity, the existing HSI classification methods would
be roughly categorized into two groups according to whether

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

there is a Mamba or not, and we record them as non-Mambaand Mamba-based methods.
A. Non-Mamba-Based Methods
In the last few years, CNNs have dominated the HSI
classification community due to their powerful feature representation ability. Early CNN-based methods leverage 2-D
convolutions to mine local spatial information from HSIs. For
example, a contextual deep CNN was proposed in [61], which
embeds the residual connections into a normal CNN to deepen
and widen the network. This way, the discriminative local
features can be obtained using the limited training samples.
Considering the specific structure of HSIs (i.e., 3-D cube data),
Zheng et al. [62] developed a mixed CNN network in which
the 2-D and 3-D convolutions are used simultaneously. This
model mitigates the shortcomings of 2-D convolution in
exploring spectral knowledge and greatly improves the HSI
classification results. Later, with the boom of the attention
mechanism [63], an increasing number of CNN-based methods have been presented with the help of various attention
mechanisms. For instance, Hang et al. [64] proposed an
attention-aided CNN network. It respectively adopts the spatial
and spectral attention module to help CNN capture the discriminative spatial positions and bands. Thus, more accurate
classification results can be obtained.
Although CNN-based methods perform well, the longdistance information hidden in HSIs cannot be fully explored,
which limits their behavior more or less. To overcome this
problem, Transformer [21], [27] enters into the field of HSI
classification. Benefiting from its powerful global modeling capabilities, Transformer has quickly gained popularity
in HSI classification tasks, and Transformer-based methods
have also become the mainstream approaches. Hong et al.
[65] proposed a network called SpectralFormer to complete
HSI classification. It may be the first Transformer-based
method, and its contributions lie in breaking the limitation of the receptive field of traditional CNNs and using
multihead self-attention to fully model the long-distance
dependency between spectra. Another network named morphological Transformer (MorphFormer) was developed under
the Transformer architecture in [66]. It first combines the
dilation and erosion operations to construct a morphological convolution to explore the rich local clues. Then, along
with the self-attention mechanism, MorphFormer can better
realize the information interaction of structure and shape to
enhance the results. To further investigate the spatial–spectral
information within HSIs, Jiang et al. [67] introduced graph
generative structure-aware Transformer (GraphGST) with the
assistance of Transformer. Instead of using HSI patches or
pixel embeddings, GraphGST adopts the graph to generate
the tokens for the multihead self-attention. In this fashion,
the non-Euclidean structural relationships between tokens can
be captured, improving the discrimination of spatial–spectral
features. Unlike the above methods, the method published
in [68] reconsiders the role of central pixels in HSIs and
proposes a relative position encoding scheme to avoid information interference caused by absolute position. Based on

5510319

this scheme, a spectral–spatial center attention (SSCA) is
developed, which uses the spectral features in the center
pixel to query the spatial features in adjacent pixels for more
accurate classification.
Recognizing the unique advantages of CNN and Transformer, researchers tend to combine them for HSI classification. Such methods have local and global modeling abilities,
which is good for comprehensively extracting spatial–spectral
features. For example, Xu et al. [69] proposed a dual-branch
network named double branch convolution-transformer network (DBCTNet), where CNN and Transformer are combined
in parallel. On the one hand, a convolution-improved Transformer encoder captures long-distance dependencies. On the
other hand, a 3-D-CNN is used to model local spatial–spectral
information. Both global and local information are taken
into account to achieve more accurate classification results.
Similarly, a convolutional transformer dual-branch network
with efficient interactive self-attention (EISA) was introduced
in [70] named dual-branch convolutional transformer network
(DCTN). The Transformer branch uses efficient interactive
selfattention (ESIA) to interactively fuse the features of height,
width, and depth to fully extract global features, while the
CNN branch uses 2-D convolution to enhance local features.
In this way, the accuracy of HSI classification is further
improved.
B. Mamba-Based Methods
Recently, Mamba [39], [40] has become an effective alternative to Transformer due to its advantages in the global
receptive field and linear complexity. Many scholars are
attempting to apply Mamba to the HSI classification. The
first work is an HSIMamba proposed in [57]. It designs a
bidirectional SSM to model the global spectral sequences
with lower computational complexity, breaking through the
dilemma of Transformer under limited computing resources.
Yao et al. [56] developed another Mamba-based method named
SpectralMamba. It uses a piecewise sequential scanning (PSS)
strategy to divide high-dimensional spectral bands into shorter
sequences, enabling SSM to fully explore the spectrum’s local
information and long-term context. In addition, while reducing
the computational scale, it also breaks the dimensionality
curse of HSIs. The above methods mainly focus on modeling
spectral features. In contrast, Mamba-in-Mamba architecture
(MiM) [53] pays more attention to spatial feature extraction.
It first develops a centralized Mamba cross-scan scheme based
on cross scan to help Mamba better understand the spatial
context. Then, a tokenized Mamba (T-Mamba) encoder with a
Gaussian decay mask (GDM), a semantic token learner (STL),
and a semantic token fuser (STF) are created and integrated
to improve the classification accuracy further.
Unlike the mentioned methods that only apply Mamba to
explore the spatial or spectral messages from HSIs, some other
works use Mamba to extract features from space and spectrum.
For example, Wang et al. [54] proposed a spatial-spectral
state space model (S2 Mamba) for HSI classification. It first
uses Mamba to explore long-range dependencies in space and
spectrum dimensions. Then, a spatial–spectral mixture gate is

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 1. Overall framework of SpiralMamba. It primarily consists of three components: a SpaME, a SpeME, and an SSCFM. An HSI patch X is initially
embedded using a 1 × 1 convolution. Then, SpaME and SpeME are used to encode the spatial contextual information and the spectral long-range dependencies,
resulting in spatial and spectral features Fspa and Fspe , respectively. Next, they are simultaneously input into SSCFM to obtain the spatial–spectral fused feature
Ffuse . Finally, a simple classifier is used to predict the final classification results.

constructed to fuse the extracted spatial–spectral features adaptively. Using these valuable features, satisfactory classification
maps can be produced. For another example, a spectral–
spatial Mamba (SS-Mamba) was presented in [55], which also
focuses on learning useful spatial–spectral features from HSIs.
An SS-Mamba block (SS-MB) is developed to mine and
interact with the spatial and spectral information. By stacking
multiple SS-MBs, the high-level features can be extracted.
Unlike normal Mamba-based networks, SS-Mamba uses position encoding instead of a scanning mechanism to ensure
position information during sequence transition. This can
avoid considering the scanning order, and the combination
with spatial and spectral tokens can also achieve accurate
information representation. Not surprisingly, combining CNN
and Mamba is also a helpful solution for HSI classification. Sheng et al. [51] constructed a DualMamba, where a
lightweight CNN and Mamba are incorporated in a parallel
architecture. DualMamba uses the Mamba branch to model
the spatial and spectral features from the global aspect and
leverages the CNN branch to improve the local perception
ability. This way, the HSI classification results are further
improved.
III. M ETHOD
A. Overall Framework
The overall architecture of SpiralMamba is shown in Fig. 1,
mainly enclosing three parts: a SpaME, a SpeME, and an
SSCFM. Consistent with the usual HSI classification networks [65], [71], [72], our SpiralMamba’s inputs are the HSI
patches. For an HSI patch X ∈ R P×P×B (where P and B
represent the patch size and the number of spectral bands,
respectively), SpiralMamba first uses a 1 × 1 convolution
to embed it into Xemb ∈ R P×P×N , where N means the feature dimension. This step can maintain spatial information
and help the model better process and understand highdimensional HSIs. Then, SpaME and SpeME are respectively

applied on Xemb to fully extract spatial context information
and long-range spectral dependencies and generate the spatial
feature Fspa ∈ R P×P×N and spectral feature Fspe ∈ R P×P×N .
Next, SSCFM is used to fuse Fspa and Fspe with the consideration of their hidden relationships. When we get the fused
spatial–spectral feature Ffuse ∈ R P×P×N , a simple classifier is
adopted to produce the final classification results.
B. Spatial Mamba Encoder
SpaME aims to comprehensively explore discriminative
spatial features. As shown in Fig. 1, SpaME consists of a
spatial spiral Mamba (SpaSM), an MLP (composed of two
linear layers and a GELU layer [73]), two layer normalization
(LN) layers, and two residual modules. The whole procedure
of SpaME can be formulated as follows:
XSM = SpaSM(LN(Xemb )) + Xemb
Fspa = MLP(LN(XSM )) + XSM

(1)

where XSM and Fspa indicate the outputs of SpaSM and
SpaME, and SpaSM(·), MLP(·), and LN(·) denote the functions of SpaSM, MLP, and LN, respectively. Among them,
SpaSM is responsible for mining the contextual relationship
between spatial tokens, while MLP focuses on modeling the
spatial features within the spatial tokens. In this way, SpaME
to fully understand the spatial information.
The core part of SpaME is SpaSM, which is developed
based on an improved Mamba [42] since it is more suitable
for modeling 2-D visual data. The flowchart of SpaSM is
displayed in Fig. 2, whose basic components are two linear
layers, a depthwise convolution (DWConv) layer [74], a sigmoid linear unit (SiLU) layer [75], an SSM layer [39], and an
LN layer. Besides, we develop a spatial spiral scan strategy and
a spatial spiral merge scheme, and embed them before/after the
SSM layer. For clarity, we will refer to them as spiral scan and
spiral merge in the following explanation. Unlike usual flatten
or cross scan, the spiral scan fully considers the characteristics

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the SpaSM. The input data is first passed through a
linear layer, a DWConv layer, and a SiLU layer to obtain 2-D features Xspa .
Then, the spatial spiral scan is used to convert Xspa into eight different 1-D
spatial sequences. The spatial clues can be explored using these sequences
along with eight unshared SSMs. Next, the spiral merge is used to restore the
processed sequences into 2-D versions and combine them. Finally, the output
of SpaSM can be obtained by passing the restored and integrated feature
through an LN layer and a linear layer. ①–⑧ in the figure refer to the eight
different spatial spiral scan paths.

of HSI patches and unfolds along the central pixel. It can
ensure the position of the neighborhood pixels relative to
the central pixel as much as possible during the sequence
transition, which avoids the SSM’s misunderstanding of spatial
information due to the loss of position information. In addition,
the spatial sequence obtained by spiral scan will not have
the problem of abrupt changes in edge pixels, and spatially
adjacent pixels are still adjacent in the sequence, which helps
SSM better capture spatial contextual relationships.
As shown in Fig. 2, spiral scan uses eight different spiral
scanning paths to convert 2-D spatial features into eight 1-D
spatial sequences with different orders. Suppose Xemb has been
mapped into Xspa ∈ R P×P×N by passing through the LN,
linear, DWConv, and SiLU layers. The definition of Xspa is


x1,1
x1,2 · · · x1,P
 x2,1
x2,2 · · · x2,P 


Xspa =  .
(2)
..
.. 
..
 ..
.
.
. 
x P,1

x P,2

···

x P,P

where xi, j ∈ R N represents the spectral features of the pixel
in the ith row and jth column. The central pixel of Xspa can
be represented as xc,c ∈ R N , where c = ((P + 1)/2). The
eight spiral paths of spiral scan for Xspa and the generated
2
eight 1-D spatial sequences {Si spa , i = 1, . . . , 8} ∈ R P ×N are
summarized as follows.
1) Path ①: Starting from the upper left corner pixel x1,1 ,
scan each pixel in a clockwise spiral until the scan ends

5510319

at the center pixel xc,c . Thus, the first 1-D sequence
S1spa = [x1,1 , x1,2 , . . . , xc,c ] is obtained.
2) Paths ②–④: Same as path ①, except that the
starting point is replaced by the upper right corner pixel x1,P , the lower left corner pixel x P,1 ,
and the lower right corner pixel x P,P , respectively. The endpoint is still the center pixel xc,c .
Thus, the second to fourth 1-D sequences S2spa =
[x1,P , x2,P , . . . , xc,c ], S3spa = [x P,1 , x P,2 , . . . , xc,c ], and
S4spa = [x P,P , x P,P−1 , . . . , xc,c ] are obtained.
3) Paths ⑤–⑧: These four paths are the reversal of the
previous paths ①–④, forming a counterclockwise spiral
path with the center pixel as the starting point and
the four vertex pixels x1,1 , x1,P , x P,1 , and x P,P as the
endpoints. Thus, S5spa = [xc,c , . . . , x1,2 , x1,1 ], S6spa =
[xc,c , . . . , x2,P , x1,P ], S7spa = [xc,c , . . . , x P,2 , x P,1 ], and
S8spa = [xc,c , . . . , x P,P−1 , x P,P ] are obtained.
The reasons for setting the scanning path this way are
summarized as follows.
1) Emphasizing the Importance of the Center Pixel: Due
to Mamba’s sequential processing mechanism, it tends
to focus more on the end of the sequence. The positive
spiral paths (i.e., ①–④) end at the center pixel, ensuring
that Mamba pays more attention to the most crucial
position (the center pixel) and captures the HSI patch’s
core information.
2) Bidirectional Context Capture: The positive spiral paths
traverse in the clockwise direction, while the reverse
spiral paths (i.e., ⑤–⑧) follow the counterclockwise
direction. By combining them, SpaSM can capture the
spatial context in both directions, free from the constraints of a single direction.
3) Preserving Spatial Continuity: Flatten operation and
cross scan often disturb the spatial clues at edge pixels.
The proposed spiral scan ensures the continuity of
spatial information, avoiding sudden discontinuities.
4) Maintain the Positions Relative to the Center Pixel: HSI
patches are generated according to the center pixel. Our
spiral scan can preserve neighboring pixels’ positions
relative to the center pixel throughout the sequence
conversion. This minimizes the loss of positional information that could lead to misinterpretation by the
model.
When we get various sequences, we will input them into
eight unshared SSMs to model the relationship between spatial
pixels. This step can be expressed as follows:


hij = Āspa hij−1 + B̄spa Sispa
j




i
i
i
(3)
Qspa = Cspa h j + Sspa
j

j

where Āspa , B̄spa , and Cspa represent the learnable parameters
in SSM, hij represents the jth hidden state of the ith sequence,
2
and Qispa ∈ R P ×N implies the output of SSMs. In this fashion,
the spatial clues hidden in HSIs can be fully analyzed from
the global aspects.
To facilitate subsequent feature processing, {Qi spa , i =
1, . . . , 8} should be restored into 2-D version and inte-

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Therefore, the bidirectional scan first flattens Xspe along the
spatial dimension. After the forward and reverse scanning,
2
two different spectral sequences {S1spe , S2spe } ∈ R N ×P can be
achieved. Then, the two spectral sequences obtained are input
into two unshared SSMs to extract the contextual information
between spectra from a global perspective. The following
formula can express this process:


h̃ij = Āspe h̃ij−1 + B̄spe Sispe
j




i
i
i
Qspe = Cspe h̃ j + Sspe
(5)
j

Fig. 3. Flowchart of the SpeBiM. The input features are first processed
by the linear, DWConv, and SiLU layers to generate Xspe . Then, a spectral
bidirectional scan is applied on Xspe to convert them into two 1-D spectral
sequences in forward and reverse directions. The long-range spectral dependencies can be mined by two unshared SSMs. Next, a spectral bidirectional
merge combines sequences and reshapes them into a 2-D version. Finally, the
output of SpeBiM can be obtained through an LN layer and a linear layer.

grated. To this end, we develop a spiral merge. Specifically,
the eight sequences are first returned along their respective scanning paths to achieve eight 2-D features with
the original spatial shape. Then, we integrate them into
a spatial feature Yspa ∈ R P×P×N by adding them element by
element.

j

where h̃ij represents the jth hidden state of the ith sequence,
Āspe , B̄spe , and Cspe represent the learnable parameters of SSM,
and {Q1spe , Q2spe } represent the output sequences of the SSMs.
Next, bidirectional merge is used to reverse Q2spe and add it to
Q1spe at element level, and then reshape the summation result
to Yspe ∈ R P×P×N . Finally, Yspe passes through an LN layer,
a linear layer, and a residual connection to obtain the SpeBiM
output XBiM .
When we get XBiM , MLC instead of MLP is used to refine
it by analyzing the value messages within spectral tokens.
MLC involves a 3 × 3 convolution layer and a 3 × 3 dilated
convolution layer. Also, each comes with a ReLU layer and
a batch normalization (BN) layer. Assume that XBiM has
been mapped into X0MLC through an LN layer. X0MLC is first
passed through the 3 × 3 convolution layer with ReLU and
BN to obtain the intermediate feature X1MLC . Next, X1MLC is
passed through the 3 × 3 dilated convolution with ReLU and
BN further to capture discriminative information in a larger
receptive field and achieve the output of MLC X2MLC .

C. Spectral Mamba Encoder
SpeME aims to extract complex spectral features from the
global and local perspectives. As shown in Fig. 1, SpeME
consists of a spectral bidirectional Mamba (SpeBiM), an MLC,
two LN layers, and two residual modules. Its formula is
expressed as follows:
XBiM = SpeBiM(LN(Xemb )) + Xemb
Fspe = MLC(LN(XBiM )) + XBiM

(4)

where XBiM and Fspe represent the outputs of SpeBiM and
SpeME, and SpeBiM(·), MLC(·), and LN(·) denote the functions of SpeBiM, MLC, and LN, respectively. Here, SpeBiM
is used to model the global long-term dependencies between
spectral tokens, and MLC focuses on extracting local features
within spectral tokens. With the cooperation of SpeBiM and
MLC, SpeME can encode high-dimensional spectral features
comprehensively and accurately.
The structure of SpeBiM is shown in Fig. 3. Like SpaME,
it mainly encloses two linear layers, a DWConv layer, a SiLU
layer, an SSM layer, and an LN layer. Before and after the
SSM layer, a spectral bidirectional scan and a spectral bidirectional merge are embedded. For simplicity, we refer to them as
bidirectional scan and bidirectional merge. Suppose Xemb has
been mapped into Xspe ∈ R P×P×N by the LN, linear, DWConv,
and SiLU layers. Since the spectral bands of HSIs are continuous, the spectral features can be regarded as sequences.

D. Spatial–Spectral Complementary Fusion Module
The target of SSCFM is to fully integrate spatial and spectral
features extracted by two Mamba Encoders. As shown in
Fig. 1, this module can be divided into three steps, i.e.,
relationship modeling, weight enhancement, and fusion.
There is an RLB in the relationship modeling step,
which aims to mine the complex spatial–spectral relationships
between Fspa ∈ R P×P×N and Fspe ∈ R P×P×N . After concatenating Fspa and Fspe into Fcat ∈ R P×P×2N , the relationship
weight W ∈ R P×P can be obtained by the RLB, which consists
of two 3 × 3 convolutions, an LN layer, a GELU layer, and a
sigmoid layer. Here, W can be regarded as the spatial weight
Wspa ∈ R P×P . Thus, 1 − W can be deemed as the spectral
weight Wspe ∈ R P×P . The following formula can represent
the above process:

W = RLB Cat Fspa , Fspe
Wspa = W, Wspe = 1 − W
(6)
where RLB(·) represents the function of RLB, and Cat(·)
implies the concatenation operation.
In the weight enhancement step, considering the potential
anomalies of same-object with different-spectral or samespectral with different-object situations in HSIs, not all features are trustworthy. Therefore, TEM is applied to refine
the spatial and spectral weights, which can be expressed

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

5510319

as follows:


Wspa i j > λ

 1,

Wspa i j < 1 − λ
W′spa
= 0,

ij


Wspa i j , otherwise


Wspe i j > λ

 1,



Wspe i j < 1 − λ
= 0,
W′spe

ij


Wspe i j , otherwise





(7)

where (Wspa )i j , (Wspe )i j , (W′spa )i j , and (W′spe )i j indicate
the values of the ith row and jth column in the spatial and
spectral weights before and after refinement, and λ denotes
a threshold with a value range of [0.5, 1]. In this way, lower
values in the relationship weight can be filtered, and higher
values can be enhanced, which allows our model to trust
the party with higher credibility and eliminates redundant
erroneous information.
In the fusion step, the refined relationship weights W′spa ∈
P×P
R
and W′spe ∈ R P×P are used to perform a weighted sum
of the spatial and spectral features for the fused feature Ffuse ∈
R P×P×N , which can be defined as follows:
Ffuse = W′spa · Fspa + W′spe · Fspe .

Fig. 4. Examples of the IP dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) and (c) Ground
truth of the training and testing sets. The bottom icons show the specific
categories represented by each color.

TABLE I
DATA D IVISION ON IP

(8)

E. Classifier
At the top of SpiralMamba, a simple classifier is used to
generate the final classification probability distribution Ŷ by
using the fused features Ffuse . As shown in Fig. 1, the classifier
consists of an LN layer, an average pooling layer, a linear
layer, and a softmax layer. This article adopts the ordinary
cross-entropy loss to supervise model learning. Its formula is
C
X


L ce Y, Ŷ = −
Yi log Ŷi

(9)

i=1

where C is the number of class, Y is the ground truth, and Ŷi
is the probability of category i.
IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Datasets
The following four datasets are selected to verify our SpiralMamba, including Indian Pines (IP),1 Pavia University (PU),1
Houston 2013 (HUS2013),2 and Houston 2018 (HUS2018).3
1) IP: It is a vegetation coverage map of Indiana,
USA, which contains 16 different vegetation categories.
The collected HSI consists of 145 × 145 pixels and
220 spectral bands. To improve IP’s quality and usability, 20 noisy and water absorption bands are removed
from the original HSI. Fig. 4 shows its false-color image
and the ground truth of the training and testing sets. The
division of this dataset is shown in Table I.
2) PU: This HSI depicts the land cover of the University
of Pavia and surrounding regions, with nine different
1 http://lesun.weebly.com/hyperspectral-data-set.html
2 http://www.grss-ieee.org/community/technical-committees/data-fusion
3 https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/2018-ieee-grss-data-fusionchallenge-%E2%80%93-fusion-multispectral-lidar-and-hyperspectral-data

land object categories. It has 610 × 340 pixels and
115 bands. Twelve noisy bands are removed from
the data to enhance PU’s usability and quality. The
false-color image and the ground truth of the training
and testing sets are exhibited in Fig. 5. The data division
of PU is shown in Table II.
3) HUS2013: This dataset shows the land cover of the
University of Houston and the surrounding areas. It contains 15 different landform categories. The collected
data contains 349 × 1905 pixels and 144 spectral bands.
Fig. 6 presents the false-color image and the ground truth
of the training and testing sets. Table III summarizes the
specific data division.
4) HUS2018: This dataset, sourced from the 2018 IEEE
GRSS Data Fusion Contest [76], captures ground objects
of Houston city with a 1-m spatial resolution and
48 spectral bands. Its spatial size is 601 × 2384, and
504 856 pixels are labeled with 20 semantic categories.
We randomly select 100 samples for each category to
construct the training set, and the rest samples are used
to establish the testing set. The detailed split is presented
in Table IV. Fig. 7 illustrates HUS2018’s false-color
image and the ground truth for the training and test sets.
Compared to the above three datasets, HUS2018 offers
a larger scale of ground object information and richer
categories.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE III
DATA D IVISION ON HUS2013

Fig. 5. Examples of the PU dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) and (c) Ground
truth of the training and testing sets. The bottom icons show the specific
categories represented by each color.
TABLE II
DATA D IVISION ON PU

Fig. 7. Examples of the HUS2018 dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) and
(c) Ground truth of the training and testing sets. The bottom icons show the
specific categories represented by each color.

Fig. 6. Examples of the HUS2013 dataset. (a) False-color image. (b) and
(c) Ground truth of the training and testing sets. The bottom icons show the
specific categories represented by each color.

Note that the data partition schemes for IP, PU, and HUS2013
are in accordance with SprectralFormer [65], and HUS2018
conforms to [77].
B. Implementation Details
1) Experimental Environment and Settings: The experiments are conducted on a GeForce RTX 3090 with
24 GB video memory. The experimental environment is

Python 3.10 and PyTorch 2.1. We adopt the adaptive moment
estimation with weight decay (AdamW) algorithm [78] as
the optimizer to train our model. The initial learning rate,
training epochs, and batch size are set to 0.0001, 500, and
64, respectively. The above settings are consistent on the four
datasets. As mentioned in Section III-A, the input data of
SpiralMamba is HSI patches. In the following experiments,
the patch sizes of IP, PU, HUS2013, and HUS2018 are set to
15, 15, 11, and 17, respectively. In addition, the threshold λ
(see Section III-D) should be set in advance. Its empirically
optimal values for IP, PU, HUS2013, and HUS2018 are
0.95, 0.90, 0.70, and 0.85, respectively. The influence of
patch size and λ will be analyzed in detail in Section IV-E.
All experiments are repeated five times randomly to avoid
randomness affecting the experimental results. The average
results and their variances are reported in this article.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

TABLE IV
DATA D IVISION ON HUS2018

2) Evaluation Metrics: Three evaluation metrics [69],
overall accuracy (OA), average accuracy (AA), and Kappa
coefficient, are used to measure the performance of SpiralMamba quantitatively. OA is the overall accuracy of all
categories, which aims to evaluate the model’s overall performance. AA is the average accuracy of each category, which
reflects the average performance of each category and the
degree of category imbalance. Kappa coefficient is a measure
of observed and expected consistency.
C. Comparison to Existing Methods
Eleven models are selected to comprehensively assess the
performance of SpiralMamba, including SpectralFormer [65],
MorphFormer [66], spectral query spatial transformer (SQSFormer) [68], GraphGST [67], DBCTNet [69], HSIMamba [57], S2 Mamba [54], MiM [53], MambaHSI [58],
local-to-global Mamba (MambaLG) [59], and interval group
spatial -spectral Mamba framework (IGroupSS-Mamba) [60].
The first five methods are Transformer-based models, in which
SpectralFormer, MorphFormer, and SQSFormer are purely
developed based on the Transformer, GraphGST is proposed
with the help of graph and Transformer, and DBCTNet is
constructed with the assistance of the combination of CNN and
Transformer. The last six methods are Mamba-based models.
All compared approaches are implemented using their opensource codes, and their specific hyperparameters follow the
original papers. To be fair, the compared models’ data division
and experimental environment are consistent with ours, which
are discussed in Section IV-B1.
1) Comparison of Numerical Results: Table V presents the
results of different methods counted on the IP dataset. We can
find that the weakest model is SpectralFormer. This is because
it only leverages the vanilla Transformer to complete HSI classification, which can be regarded as an initial attempt to apply
Transformers in the HSI community. The Mamba-based models (i.e., S2 Mamba, MiM, MambaHSI, and IGroupSS-Mamba)

5510319

outperform the Transformer-based networks. This happens
because SSM in Mamba uses continuous-time dynamic
equations to describe the state evolution of the system,
which allows Mamba to study the spectral sequence more
directly and efficiently and enhances the discriminability of
spectral features. However, the performance of HSIMamba
and MambaLG does not meet our expectations. The reasons behind this are as follows. HSIMamba explores hidden
features in the spectral dimension while neglecting spatial
modeling. Although MambaLG can extract spatial and spectral
features from local to global contexts, its simple feature
fusion scheme leads to the loss of essential features. Although
the compared models’ results are good, our SpiralMamba
still performs best in OA, AA, and Kappa coefficient, with
values of 97.76%, 98.76%, and 97.43. Taking OA as an
example, our method outperforms SpectralFormer and HSIMamba, which initially explore Transformer and Mamba,
by 14.56% and 10.59%. This is because our dual-branch fusion
architecture is more effective at capturing spatial–spectral
clues. Compared to other Transformer-based models (i.e.,
MorphFormer, SQSFormer, GraphGST, and DBCTNet), our
model surpasses them by 1.25%, 1.5%, 2.87%, and 0.91%.
This demonstrates that our designed SpaME and SpeME can
accurately encode spatial context and spectral sequences with
inherent continuity. Furthermore, compared with S2 Mamba,
MiM, MambaHSI, MambaLG, and IGroupSS-Mamba, the
improvements achieved by SpiralMamba are 0.58%, 0.64%,
1.06%, 6.67%, and 0.78%. This illustrates the usefulness of
the proposed spiral scan, facilitating SpiralMamba’s ability
to capture hidden spatial information and achieve optimal
classification results.
Table VI records the experimental results for all models on
the PU dataset. As expected, our model achieves the highest
OA, AA, and Kappa coefficient scores, which are 98.27%,
97.84%, and 97.66. Besides the positive results mentioned
above, there is an encouraging observation: SpiralMamba is
the most stable model for this dataset. In contrast, other
models exhibit greater variation in performance across different categories. For example, MambaLG performs best in
classes 4 and 8 but poorly in classes 1, 2, and 3. For
another example, IGroupSS-Mamba can accurately classify the
samples in class 5. However, its performance for classes 1
and 3 is weak. By comparison, although our SpiralMamba
does not achieve the best in some categories, it consistently
maintains a competitive level. These positive results are primarily attributed to the following factors. First, SpiralMamba’s
comprehensive spatial–spectral modeling plays a key role.
Spatially, the eight distinct spiral scan paths cover spatial information from various directions, allowing SpaME to encode
spatial features more thoroughly. Spectrally, the complementary cooperation between bidirectional Mamba and MLC
captures global bidirectional spectral information between
tokens while locally perceiving detailed variations within each
token, thus enabling comprehensive spectral feature modeling. Second, the effective spatial–spectral fusion provided
by SSCFM further reduces the misclassification. By deeply
modeling the relationships within the spatial–spectral information and refining the spatial–spectral weights, SSCFM ensures

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON IP, I NCLUDING THE R ESULTS OF E ACH C LASS AND THE OA,
AA, AND K APPA C OEFFICIENT VALUES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON PU, I NCLUDING THE R ESULTS OF E ACH C LASS AND THE OA,
AA, AND K APPA C OEFFICIENT VALUES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

more accurate complementary fusion, reducing misclassifications in uncommon conditions.
The results of various models counted on HUS2013 are
shown in Table VII. This dataset is large in pixel volume and
intricate in land cover distribution, which increases classification difficulty. Consequently, there is a substantial variation
in the performance across different models. Even so, SpiralMamba still delivers the optimal performance. For example,
for the Kappa coefficient, our enhancements are 7.68 (over
SpectralFormer), 1.89 (over MorphFormer), 6.98 (over SQSFormer), 4.33 (over GraphGST), 3.28 (over DBCTNet), 5.06
(over HSIMamba), 1.11 (over S2 Mamba), 5.16 (over MiM),
0.87 (over MambaHSI), 4.64(over MambaLG) and 3.13 (over
IGroupSS-Mamba). These encouraging results demonstrate the
advantages of SpiralMamba and capability to handle complex
data. However, we cannot ignore a notable investigation, that
is, SpiralMamba does not achieve the highest accuracy in
some categories. Especially for class 1 (“Healthy Grass”) and
class 3 (“Synthetic Grass”), the gaps between the proposed
model and the optimal methods are distinct. The main reason behind this is the insufficient local feature exploration
of SpiralMamba in spatial contexts. Particularly, the classes
mentioned above are spatially adjacent and similar to visual.
Therefore, the difficulty of recognizing them is inherently high.
To successfully classify them, more local details should be
captured. However, our SpiralMamba pays more attention to

extracting spatial global context information. The local spatial
clues do not receive the attention they deserve, resulting in
unsatisfactory results in these categories. We plan to improve
this aspect in future work to achieve better performance across
more categories.
The results of all methods on HUS2018 are summarized in
Table VIII. Our SpiralMamba achieves the best performance
across three metrics, reaching 84.03% (OA), 89.67% (AA),
and 79.69 (Kappa), respectively. Compared to Transformerbased methods, our approach outperforms the best-performing
DBCTNet by 2.55% and the lowest-performing SpectralFormer by 15.29% in OA. These improvements stem from
two factors. First, SpiralMamba adopts the sequence model
Mamba, which is better suited for directly capturing spectral
sequences, enhancing efficiency and performance. Second,
our dual-branch fusion architecture can comprehensively
extract spatial–spectral information and achieve more accurate
fusion. Compared to Mamba-based methods, SpiralMamba
surpasses the best-performing MambaHSI by 2.4% and the
lowest-performing HSIMamba by 12.27% in OA. This success
can be attributed to the spiral scan and the MLC module,
which effectively convey spatial information and perceive local
details within spectral tokens. Together, these components
enable more accurate and comprehensive modeling of spatial and spectral features, leading to superior classification
results.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

5510319

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON HUS2013, I NCLUDING THE R ESULTS OF E ACH C LASS AND THE
OA, AA, AND K APPA C OEFFICIENT VALUES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON HUS2018, I NCLUDING THE R ESULTS OF E ACH C LASS AND THE
OA, AA, AND K APPA C OEFFICIENT VALUES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

Fig. 8. Ground truth and classification maps of different methods on IP. (a) Ground truth. (b) SpectralFormer. (c) MorphFormer. (d) SQSFormer. (e) GraphGST.
(f) DBCTNet. (g) HSIMamba. (h) S2 Mamba. (i) MiM. (j) MambaHSI. (k) MambaLG. (l) IGroupSS-Mamba. (m) Ours.

2) Comparison of Visual Results: To further study SpiralMamba, we visualize its classification maps for the four
datasets in Figs. 8–11. The results of the compared methods
are also exhibited for reference. For IP (see Fig. 8), the classi-

fication maps of SpectralFormer, HSIMamba, GraphGST, and
MambaLG differ significantly from the ground truth, showing dense artifacts of misclassification. Although the visual
results of MorphFormer, SQSFormer, DBCTNet, S2 Mamba,

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 9. Ground truth and classification maps of different methods on PU. (a) Ground truth. (b) SpectralFormer. (c) MorphFormer. (d) SQSFormer. (e) GraphGST.
(f) DBCTNet. (g) HSIMamba. (h) S2 Mamba. (i) MiM. (j) MambaHSI. (k) MambaLG. (l) IGroupSS-Mamba. (m) Ours.

Fig. 10. Ground truth and classification maps of different methods on HUS2013. (a) Ground truth. (b) SpectralFormer. (c) MorphFormer. (d) SQSFormer.
(e) GraphGST. (f) DBCTNet. (g) HSIMamba. (h) S2 Mamba. (i) MiM. (j) MambaHSI. (k) MambaLG. (l) IGroupSS-Mamba. (m) Ours.

MiM, MambaHSI, and IGroupSS-Mamba are better, they still
exhibit misclassification errors at the land cover boundaries.
In contrast, our SpiralMamba shows the highest similarity with
the ground truth, achieving relatively accurate classifications
in smooth and boundary regions. For PU (see Fig. 9), all
compared models perform weakly in distinguishing the “Bare
Soil” (light blue in the center) and “Meadows” (light green
at the bottom). The distinct errors can be found in SQSFormer, GraphGST, DBCTNet, HSIMamba, and MambaLG’s

maps, where the “Bare Soil” is misclassified into “Meadows,” “Shadows,” “Metal Sheets,” or “Bricks.” SpectralFormer,
MorphFormer, S2 Mamba, MiM, MambaHSI, and IGroupSSMamba’s maps are better but fail to reach satisfactory results.
In comparison, our SpiralMamba exhibits the fewest misclassifications and presents the most similar predictions to the
ground truth. For HUS2013 (see Fig. 10), SpectralFormer,
SQSFormer, DBCTNet, and HSIMamba show the powerless
performance. In the enlarged detail sections, these models

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

5510319

Fig. 11. Ground truth and classification maps of different methods on HUS2018. (a) Ground truth. (b) SpectralFormer. (c) MorphFormer. (d) SQSFormer.
(e) GraphGST. (f) DBCTNet. (g) HSIMamba. (h) S2 Mamba. (i) MiM. (j) MambaHSI. (k) MambaLG. (l) IGroupSS-Mamba. (m) Ours.

misclassify “Highway” (olive green) as “Soil” (pink) or
“Road” (dark blue). MorphFormer, GraphGST, S2 Mamba,
MiM MambaHSI, MambaLG, and IGroupSS-Mamba perform
slightly better but still struggle with edge areas. In contrast,
our SpiralMamba produces the best prediction results. For
HUS2018 (see Fig. 11), methods, such as SpectralFormer,
GraphGST, DBCTNet, HSIMamba, and MiM, exhibit suboptimal classification maps. Particularly in zoomed-in regions, flat
“Commercial” areas are misclassified as “Residential,” “Cars,”
or “Trains.” In contrast, MorphFormer, SQSFormer, S2 Mamba,
MambaHSI, MambaLG, and IGroupSS-Mamba show fewer
misclassifications. SpiralMamba produces a classification map
that is most similar to the ground truth. Although minor
misclassifications remain in the central zoomed-in region,
these are limited to similar categories like “Residential” rather
than dissimilar ones like “Cars.” This is because our method
leverages Mamba’s global modeling capability to accurately
interpret flat and concentrated regions (e.g., “commercial”)
from a global perspective, minimizing the impact of local noise
and yielding a satisfactory classification map.
Overall, in challenging scenarios, such as boundary regions
and confusable classes, most models struggle to make accurate
distinctions, which negatively impacts overall classification
performance. However, our model maintains a relatively

superior classification ability, achieving predictions similar to
the ground truth. This is attributed not only to the advanced
spatial modeling capability of SpaME and the powerful spectral feature extraction ability of SpeME but also to the accurate
and effective spatial–spectral fusion by SSCFM. The synergy
of these components enables SpiralMamba to deliver satisfactory classification results.
D. Ablation Studies
To validate the contributions of different components of
SpiralMamba, a series of ablation experiments are conducted
under the same experimental environment and settings as
described in Section IV-B1. These experiments include overall ablation, scanning strategy ablation, and fusion module
ablation.
1) Overall Ablation: We performed an incremental ablation
for the proposed spiral scan, MLC, and SSCFM by either using
or excluding each component. When spiral scan and SSCFM
are not used, the simplest operations (flatten and addition) are
applied as replacements. Table IX shows the detailed experimental results. It can be observed that there is the same pattern
in four datasets. The baseline without these components yields
the lowest performance. Using spiral scan, MLC, or SSCFM
individually improves results, combining any two components

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE IX
√
OVERALL A BLATION E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF E ACH C OMPONENT ON IP, PU, HUS2013, AND HUS2018. M EANS THE
C OMPONENT I S U SED , AND B LANK M EANS I T I S N OT U SED . T HE B EST R ESULT I S B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

TABLE X
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT S CANNING S TRATEGIES ON IP, PU, HUS2013, AND HUS2018.
T HE B EST R ESULT I S B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

TABLE XI
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF S PIRAL S CAN W ITH D IFFERENT S CANNING D IRECTIONS . T HE B EST R ESULT I S B OLDED

further enhances performance, and employing all three (the
complete SpiralMamba) achieves optimal performance. This
is because spiral scan is well-suited for HSIs, accurately
transforming spatial information into the 1-D sequence, aiding Mamba in understanding spatial context. Additionally,
MLC’s fine-grained local modeling within spectral tokens and
SSCFM’s enhanced spatial–spectral relationship modeling and
refined fusion contribute to superior performance.
2) Scanning Strategy Ablation: To further validate the effectiveness of the proposed spiral scan, we only change the spatial
scanning strategy based on the complete SpiralMamba. Expect
the flatten operation, the comparisons with the cross scan [42]
and random scan are also conducted. The experimental results
are shown in Table X. It is obvious that SpiralMamba with
spiral scan achieves the best performance across four datasets.
This is because flatten has a single scanning direction and
suffers from information discontinuities at the edge pixels.
Although cross scan has more directions, its performance
cannot even exceed flatten, which means that it may introduce
more spatial discontinuities, causing nonadjacent pixels to
become adjacent in the sequence. Random scan is more
flexible, but its randomness disrupts the spatial locations,
interfering with the model’s learning. In contrast, our spiral
scan covers all scanning directions and ensures the continuity of spatial information. More importantly, it takes into
account the characteristics of HSI patches expanding from
the center pixel, emphasizes the importance of the center

pixel, and preserves the relative positions of neighboring
pixels to the center pixel. This allows Mamba to understand the spatial layout better, improving HSI classification
performance.
To study the impacts of the spiral scan direction on the
model’s performance, we conducted experiments with four
types of spiral scans: single, positive, reverse, and all spiral
scan. The single spiral scan follows one direction, starting
from the top-left pixel and ending at the central pixel. The
positive and reverse spiral scans involve four directional
paths, starting from the four corners and the central pixel.
All spiral scan represents the complete SpiralMamba with
eight directional paths. The results counted on four HSIs
are summarized in Table XI. By observing it, we find that
all spiral scan produced the best performance, followed by
the positive spiral scan, then the reverse spiral scan, and
the single spiral scan yielding the lowest performance. The
reasons behind these findings are summarized as follows.
First, the single-direction scan has only one fixed traversal
path, which limits Mamba from fully understanding spatial
information. Second, the four-direction positive/reverse spiral
scan increases the number of paths, providing Mamba with
more spatial awareness and leading to some performance
improvement. Third, when combining positive and reverse
spiral scans, all spiral scan grants SpiralMamba the ability to
capture spatial context bidirectionally. This accounts for the
encouraging classification results.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

5510319

TABLE XII
C OMPARISON OF THE T IME C OMPLEXITY AND P ERFORMANCE OF S PIRAL S CAN AND F LATTEN ON S PIRAL M AMBA . T HE B EST R ESULT I S B OLDED

TABLE XIII
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS R ELATED TO MLC ON IP, PU, HUS2013, AND HUS2018. T HE B EST R ESULT I S B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

TABLE XIV
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT F USION M ETHODS ON IP, PU, HUS2013, AND HUS2018. T HE B EST R ESULT I S B OLDED (M EAN ± VARIANCE )

In addition, to study if the proposed spiral scanning
technique increases the computational complexity or not,
we replace it with flatten and count the new model’s parameters (Params), memory usage in the training phase (Memory),
average training times per epoch (Training), and the inference
time costs (Inference). The results counted on different HSIs
are summarized in Table XII. The values of different criteria of
the original SpiralMamba are exhibited for comparison. Also,
the two models’ OA, AA, and Kappa values are displayed
for reference. Unsurprisingly, spiral scan increases the computational complexity in all cases. The reason is that there
are eight scanning paths in spiral scan, while flatten only has
one. However, we believe this growth is worthwhile due to
the two following points. First, the increase in complexity
is not dramatic. Compared to SpiralMamba with flatten, the
metric increases caused by spiral scan are acceptable. For
example, the Params of SpiralMamba with flatten and spiral
scan counted on HUS2018 are 0.14 and 0.15 MB. Considering
the eightfold increase in the scan path, the growth in these
parameters is minimal and tolerable. Second, the multipath
spiral scan provides higher performance gains. The OA, AA,
and Kappa values of SpiralMamba with spiral scan are higher
than that of SpiralMamba with flatten. For instance, compared
with flatten, the enhancements in OA achieved by spiral scan
are 0.20% (IP), 0.24% (PU), 0.51% (HUS2013), and 1.30%
(HUS2018).
3) MLC Ablation: To further prove the effectiveness of
the MLC, we conduct the following experiments. First, three

models are constructed, and they are named “with None,”
“with MLP,” and “with MLC.” Here, “with None” means that
we remove MLC from SpiralMamba, “with MLP” indicates
that MLC is replaced by MLP, and “with MLC” is our
SpiralMamba. Their performance counted on different HSIs
is summarized in Table XIII. By observing the results, we can
easily find that the behavior of “with None” is the weakest.
This indicates that the lack of spectral token internal information extraction in SpeME reduces the model’s classification
performance. When adding MLP and MLC, the models’
behavior is strengthened, and “with MLC” outperforms “with
MLP” in all cases. This highlights that MLC is more suitable
for modeling within spectral tokens than MLP. MLP struggles
to capture the local correlations within spectral tokens as a
global component. In contrast, MLC using convolution can
more finely perceive local variations.
4) Fusion Module Ablation: To further verify the effectiveness of SSCFM, we perform additional experiments, including
the single branch and the dual branch using addition or
concatenation fusion. The experimental results are listed in
Table XIV. It can be observed that the SpeME only performs
better than the SpaME only on the IP dataset, indicating
that spectral features are learned more effectively than spatial features. For the dual-branch fusion, the performance of
both addition and concatenation fusion is similar, and both
outperform SpaME only but are inferior to SpeME only. This
suggests that simple addition or concatenation fusion does not
significantly improve performance. On the PU, HUS2013, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 12.

OA curves of different SpiralMambas with various patch sizes on four datasets. (a) IP. (b) PU. (c) HUS2013. (d) HUS2018.

Fig. 13.

OA curves of different SpiralMambas with different λ on four datasets. (a) IP. (b) PU. (c) HUS2013. (d) HUS2018.

HUS2018, SpaME outperforms SpeME only, implying that
spatial features are more discriminative for these datasets.
In the case of dual-branch fusion, while the addition and
concatenation fusion show improvements over single branch,
there is still room for further enhancement. The dual-branch
fusion with SSCFM consistently performs best across all four
datasets. This is because SSCFM effectively captures the
complex relationships between spatial and spectral features
by RLB and uses TEM to enhance high-confidence features
while filtering out low-confidence features, resulting in more
accurate fusion.
E. Sensitivity Study
As mentioned in Section IV-B1, two free parameters should
be set in advance, they are the patch size and threshold λ.
In this section, we study their influence in detail. For clarity,
we only count OA values here.
1) Impact of Patch Size: To investigate the impact of patch
size on SpiralMamba, we vary it from 5 × 5 to 19 × 19 and
count the results of different SpiralMambas on four datasets.
The results are shown in Fig. 12. Overall, as patch size
increases, the OA first increases and then decreases for all
four datasets. This trend can be attributed to smaller patch
sizes containing less spatial context information. As the patch
size increases, spatial information becomes richer. However,
when the patch size is too large, more noise and redundant
information may be introduced to hinder the model’s learning.
Additionally, it can be observed that the best performance
on the IP, PU, HUS2013, and HUS2018 datasets is achieved
with patch sizes of 15 × 15, 15 × 15, 11 × 11, and 17 × 17,
respectively. This suggests that SpiralMamba performs better
with larger patch sizes, demonstrating its strong capability
for long-range dependency modeling. Even with a larger
patch size, it can efficiently capture spatial–spectral clues and
achieve satisfactory classification results.
However, there is a non-negligible fluctuation phenomenon
(patch size 11 × 11 for IP and 13 × 13 for HUS2013).

In IP, the distribution of land cover categories is relatively
regular and concentrated, and a larger field of view enables
a better overall understanding of the targets. Meanwhile, our
SpiralMamba, which has strong global perception capabilities,
tends to favor larger patch sizes. When the patch size is
11 × 11 (the fluctuation point), SpiralMamba’s field of view
is not large enough, potentially failing to fully activate its
global modeling ability, leading to suboptimal performance.
As the patch size increases, the field of view becomes broader,
improving performance, with the optimal result appearing
at 15 × 15. In HUS2013, the land cover is more complex,
with a more redundant background. As patch size increases,
the model’s performance peaks at 11 × 11. However, as it
increases further to 13 × 13 (the fluctuation point), excessive
redundant information may be introduced, leading to a decline
in performance. Although performance slightly improves at
15 × 15 (likely because useful spatial information outweighs
redundant information at this size), it still remains below the
peak at 11 × 11 due to the continued impact of redundancy,
and the performance shows a downward trend thereafter.
2) Impact of Threshold λ: To study the effect of the threshold λ on our model, we change its values from 0.5 to 1 with
an interval of 0.05. The performance of SpiralMamba with
different λ counted on four datasets is shown in Fig. 13. The
OA curves show a trend of increasing first and then decreasing
as λ increases, with peak values occurring at 0.95 (IP), 0.90
(PU), 0.70 (HUS2013), and 0.85 (HUS2018). When λ is set
to its minimum value of 0.5, all values in the relationship
weights are filtered (set to 0) or enhanced (set to 1) by the
TEM, resulting in a simple combination of spatial and spectral
features and the lowest OA values. When λ exceeds 0.5, the
obtained features contain spatial, spectral, and spatial–spectral
messages, and the proportion of spatial–spectral clues would
be increased as λ grows. This integration pushes the models
to achieve optimal performance. When λ reaches 1, TEM
will not refine the relationship weights. Unreliable features
may contaminate reliable features during fusion, and accurate

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

TABLE XV
PARAMETER S IZE , M EMORY U SAGE , AVERAGE T RAINING T IME
PER E POCH , AND I NFERENCE T IME OF A LL M ETHODS ON IP

5510319

spectral tokens, compensating for the limitations of SpeBiM
in modeling within the spectral token itself. In this fashion,
SpiralMamba is able to comprehensively model complex spectral features, leading to discriminative spectral representations.
Finally, SSCFM is designed to complete the spatial–spectral
information fusion. Unlike common modules, it first deeply
mines the intricate relationships between the two features.
Then, the generated relationship weights are refined by TEM
to ensure the spatial and spectral features can be considered
thoroughly. Extensive experiments counted on three publicly
available datasets validate the effectiveness of SpiralMamba.
R EFERENCES

fusion cannot be achieved. Therefore, the behavior of the
model becomes weaker.
F. Complexity Analysis
To better understand SpiralMamba’s complexity, we count
its Params, Memory, Training, and Inference on the IP dataset
and summarize them in Table XV. The results of the compared
methods are also exhibited for reference. To be fair, the HSI
patch size is fixed as 15 × 15 for all models, consistent with
SpiralMamba. From Table XV, we can observe the following
points. First, compared to the methods with similar parameter
sizes (i.e., SQSFormer, GraphGST, and MiM), SpiralMamba
not only has the shortest average training time per epoch but
also cuts inference time by half. Additionally, it demonstrates
better memory efficiency (except for GraphGST, which uses
fewer nodes in its graph structure, resulting in the least
memory usage). This shows that our model is more efficient with a similar parameter size. Second, compared to
all Transformer-based methods, SpiralMamba, despite having
more parameters, achieves comparable memory usage and
training time while consuming the least inference time. This is
due to the efficient Mamba structure. It has linear complexity
with the same sequence length, which leads to significant
time savings. Furthermore, all Mamba-based methods have
faster inference times than Transformer-based ones, further
highlighting Mamba’s efficiency.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes a new HSI classification method
based on Mamba, called SpiralMamba. It has a dual-branch
fusion architecture and aims to fully explore spatial context
and rich spectral features from HSIs for classification. First,
a SpaME is developed to mine spatial knowledge. SpaME
introduces a spatial spiral scan strategy to traverse HSI pixels
effectively at the spatial aspect. This way, HSI can be transformed into a reasonable sequence for SSM, thus enhancing
SpiralMamba’s ability to understand spatial context. Second,
a SpeME is constructed to capture spectral clues. Besides
SpeBiM, which focuses on analyzing the spectral relations,
an MLC is introduced to capture local variations within

[1] S. Qian, “Overview of hyperspectral imaging remote sensing from
satellites,” in Advances in Hyperspectral Image Processing Techniques.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2023, pp. 41–66.
[2] B. Tu, Q. Ren, J. Li, Z. Cao, Y. Chen, and A. Plaza, “NCGLF2: Network
combining global and local features for fusion of multisource remote
sensing data,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 104, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 102192.
[3] N. Audebert, B. Le Saux, and S. Lefevre, “Deep learning for classification of hyperspectral data: A comparative review,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Mag., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 159–173, Jun. 2019.
[4] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y. Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classification: An overview,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709,
Sep. 2019.
[5] N. Wambugu et al., “Hyperspectral image classification on insufficientsample and feature learning using deep neural networks: A review,” Int.
J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 105, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 102603.
[6] B. Lu, P. Dao, J. Liu, Y. He, and J. Shang, “Recent advances of hyperspectral imaging technology and applications in agriculture,” Remote
Sens., vol. 12, no. 16, p. 2659, Aug. 2020.
[7] A. Khan, A. D. Vibhute, S. Mali, and C. H. Patil, “A systematic review
on hyperspectral imaging technology with a machine and deep learning
methodology for agricultural applications,” Ecol. Informat., vol. 69,
Jul. 2022, Art. no. 101678.
[8] M. Ahmad et al., “Hyperspectral image classification—Traditional to
deep models: A survey for future prospects,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 968–999, 2022.
[9] A. Nisha and A. Anitha, “Current advances in hyperspectral remote
sensing in urban planning,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Intell. Comput.
Instrum. Control Technol. (ICICICT), Aug. 2022, pp. 94–98.
[10] J. Yuan, S. Wang, C. Wu, and Y. Xu, “Fine-grained classification of
urban functional zones and landscape pattern analysis using hyperspectral satellite imagery: A case study of Wuhan,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 3972–3991, 2022.
[11] M. B. Stuart, A. J. S. McGonigle, and J. R. Willmott, “Hyperspectral
imaging in environmental monitoring: A review of recent developments
and technological advances in compact field deployable systems,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 14, p. 3071, Jul. 2019.
[12] H. Flores et al., “UAS-based hyperspectral environmental monitoring of
acid mine drainage affected waters,” Minerals, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 182,
Feb. 2021.
[13] S. Peyghambari and Y. Zhang, “Hyperspectral remote sensing in
lithological mapping, mineral exploration, and environmental geology:
An updated review,” J. Appl. Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 3, Jul. 2021,
Art. no. 031501.
[14] A. Guha, “Mineral exploration using hyperspectral data,” in Hyperspectral Remote Sensing. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2020,
pp. 293–318.
[15] A. Hennessy, K. Clarke, and M. Lewis, “Hyperspectral classification of
plants: A review of waveband selection generalisability,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 1, p. 113, Jan. 2020.
[16] K.-H. Liu, M.-H. Yang, S.-T. Huang, and C. Lin, “Plant species
classification based on hyperspectral imaging via a lightweight convolutional neural network model,” Frontiers Plant Sci., vol. 13, Apr. 2022,
Art. no. 855660.
[17] F. Ullah, I. Ullah, R. U. Khan, S. Khan, K. Khan, and G. Pau, “Conventional to deep ensemble methods for hyperspectral image classification:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 3878–3916, 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5510319

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[18] D. Hong et al., “SpectralGPT: Spectral remote sensing foundation
model,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8,
pp. 5227–5244, Aug. 2024.
[19] M. Imani and H. Ghassemian, “An overview on spectral and spatial
information fusion for hyperspectral image classification: Current trends
and challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 59, pp. 59–83, Jul. 2020.
[20] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[21] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
[22] M. E. Paoletti, S. Moreno-Álvarez, Y. Xue, J. M. Haut, and A. Plaza,
“AAtt-CNN: Automatic attention-based convolutional neural networks
for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, pp. 1–18, May 2023, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3272639.
[23] M. Esmaeili, D. Abbasi-Moghadam, A. Sharifi, A. Tariq, and
Q. Li, “ResMorCNN model: Hyperspectral images classification using
residual-injection morphological features and 3DCNN layers,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 219–243,
2024.
[24] J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “Quantum-inspired spectral–spatial
pyramid network for hyperspectral image classification,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 9925–9934.
[25] Y. Li, Q. Xu, W. Li, and J. Nie, “Automatic clustering-based two-branch
CNN for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 7803–7816, Sep. 2021.
[26] Y. Shen et al., “Efficient deep learning of nonlocal features for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 6029–6043, Jul. 2021.
[27] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[28] W. Zhou, S.-I. Kamata, H. Wang, and X. Xue, “Multiscanningbased RNN–transformer for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, pp. 1–19, May 2023, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2023.3277014.
[29] C. Fu, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “ReSC-Net: Hyperspectral image classification based on attention-enhanced residual module and spatial-channel
attention,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–15,
May 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3402364.
[30] J. Ma, Y. Zou, X. Tang, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Spatial pooling
transformer network and noise-tolerant learning for noisy hyperspectral
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp.
1–19, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3368079.
[31] C. Zhao et al., “Hyperspectral image classification with multi-attention
transformer and adaptive superpixel segmentation-based active learning,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 3606–3621, 2023.
[32] S. Cheng, R. Chan, and A. Du, “CACFTNet: A hybrid cov-attention
and cross-layer fusion transformer network for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–17,
Mar. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3374081.
[33] J. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Ruan, Y. Dong, and L. Huang, “Dual-branch
spectral–spatial attention network for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–18, Jan. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3351997.
[34] Q. Yu, W. Wei, D. Li, Z. Pan, C. Li, and D. Hong, “HyperSINet: A synergetic interaction network combined with convolution and transformer for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, pp. 1–18, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3362471.
[35] Z. Zhao, X. Xu, S. Li, and A. Plaza, “Hyperspectral image classification
using groupwise separable convolutional vision transformer network,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–17, Mar. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3377610.
[36] X. Wang, L. Sun, C. Lu, and B. Li, “A novel transformer network with
a CNN-enhanced cross-attention mechanism for hyperspectral image
classification,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 7, p. 1180, Mar. 2024.
[37] Y. Wang, X. Yu, X. Wen, X. Li, H. Dong, and S. Zang, “Learning a
3-D-CNN and convolution transformers for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[38] J. Chen et al., “TCCU-Net: Transformer and CNN collaborative unmixing network for hyperspectral image,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 8073–8089, 2024.
[39] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
selective state spaces,” 2023, arXiv:2312.00752.
[40] T. Dao and A. Gu, “Transformers are SSMs: Generalized models and
efficient algorithms through structured state space duality,” in Proc. 41st
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–52.

[41] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
Mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–14.
[42] Y. Liu et al., “VMamba: Visual state space model,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.10166.
[43] K. Chen, B. Chen, C. Liu, W. Li, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “RSMamba:
Remote sensing image classification with state space model,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[44] Y. Yue and Z. Li, “MedMamba: Vision Mamba for medical image
classification,” 2024, arXiv:2403.03849.
[45] H. Ding et al., “A novel Mamba architecture with a semantic transformer
for efficient real-time remote sensing semantic segmentation,” Remote
Sens., vol. 16, no. 14, p. 2620, Jul. 2024.
[46] X. Ma, X. Zhang, and M.-O. Pun, “RS3 Mamba: Visual state space model
for remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[47] H. Zhang, K. Chen, C. Liu, H. Chen, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi,
“CDMamba: Remote sensing image change detection with Mamba,”
2024, arXiv:2406.04207.
[48] J. N. Paranjape, C. de Melo, and V. M. Patel, “A Mamba-based Siamese
network for remote sensing change detection,” 2024, arXiv:2407.06839.
[49] M. Zhou et al., “DMM: Disparity-guided multispectral Mamba for
oriented object detection in remote sensing,” 2024, arXiv:2407.08132.
[50] H. Zhou, X. Wu, H. Chen, X. Chen, and X. He, “RSDehamba:
Lightweight vision Mamba for remote sensing satellite image dehazing,”
2024, arXiv:2405.10030.
[51] J. Sheng, J. Zhou, J. Wang, P. Ye, and J. Fan, “DualMamba:
A lightweight spectral–spatial Mamba-convolution network for hyperspectral image classification,” 2024, arXiv:2406.07050.
[52] Y. He, B. Tu, B. Liu, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “3DSS-Mamba: 3Dspectral–spatial Mamba for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–16, Oct. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3472091.
[53] W. Zhou, S.-I. Kamata, H. Wang, M. S. Wong, and H. Hou, “Mambain-Mamba: Centralized Mamba-cross-scan in tokenized Mamba model
for hyperspectral image classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 613,
Jan. 2025, Art. no. 128751.
[54] G. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Peng, T. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “S2 Mamba:
A spatial–spectral state space model for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., early access, Jan. 17, 2025,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3530993.
[55] L. Huang, Y. Chen, and X. He, “Spectral–spatial Mamba for hyperspectral image classification,” 2024, arXiv:2404.18401.
[56] J. Yao, D. Hong, C. Li, and J. Chanussot, “SpectralMamba:
Efficient Mamba for hyperspectral image classification,” 2024,
arXiv:2404.08489.
[57] J. X. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, H. Tian, and A. W. C. Liew, “HSIMamba:
Hyperpsectral imaging efficient feature learning with bidirectional state
space for classification,” 2024, arXiv:2404.00272.
[58] Y. Li, Y. Luo, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, and B. Du, “MambaHSI:
Spatial–spectral Mamba for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3430985.
[59] Z. Pan, C. Li, A. Plaza, J. Chanussot, and D. Hong, “Hyperspectral
image classification with Mamba,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 63, pp. 1–14, Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3521411.
[60] Y. He, B. Tu, P. Jiang, B. Liu, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “IGroupSSMamba: Interval group spatial–spectral Mamba for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–17,
Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3502055.
[61] H. Lee and H. Kwon, “Going deeper with contextual CNN for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26,
no. 10, pp. 4843–4855, Oct. 2017.
[62] J. Zheng, Y. Feng, C. Bai, and J. Zhang, “Hyperspectral image
classification using mixed convolutions and covariance pooling,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 522–534,
Jan. 2021.
[63] S. K. Roy, S. Manna, T. Song, and L. Bruzzone, “Attentionbased adaptive spectral–spatial kernel ResNet for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9,
pp. 7831–7843, Sep. 2021.
[64] R. Hang, Z. Li, Q. Liu, P. Ghamisi, and S. S. Bhattacharyya, “Hyperspectral image classification with attention-aided CNNs,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2281–2293, Mar. 2021.
[65] D. Hong et al., “SpectralFormer: Rethinking hyperspectral image classification with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
pp. 1–15, 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: SpiralMamba: SPATIAL–SPECTRAL COMPLEMENTARY MAMBA WITH SPATIAL SPIRAL SCAN

[66] S. K. Roy, A. Deria, C. Shah, J. M. Haut, Q. Du, and A. Plaza, “Spectral–
spatial morphological attention transformer for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, pp. 1–15,
Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3242346.
[67] M. Jiang et al., “GraphGST: Graph generative structure-aware
transformer for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–16, Jan. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2023.3349076.
[68] N. Chen, L. Fang, Y. Xia, S. Xia, H. Liu, and J. Yue, “Spectral
query spatial: Revisiting the role of center pixel in transformer for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, pp. 1–14, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3361652.
[69] R. Xu, X.-M. Dong, W. Li, J. Peng, W. Sun, and Y. Xu, “DBCTNet:
Double branch convolution-transformer network for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–15,
Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3368141.
[70] Y. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Yang, J. Peng, and Y. Ban, “DCTN:
Dual-branch convolutional transformer network with efficient interactive self-attention for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–16, Feb. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3364143.
[71] S. Jia, Y. Wang, S. Jiang, and R. He, “A center-masked transformer for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, pp. 1–16, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3369075.
[72] F. Xu, S. Mei, G. Zhang, N. Wang, and Q. Du, “Bridging CNN and
transformer with cross-attention fusion network for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–14,
Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3419266.
[73] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian error linear units (GELUs),”
2016, arXiv:1606.08415.
[74] F. Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jul. 2017, pp. 1251–1258.
[75] S. Elfwing, E. Uchibe, and K. Doya, “Sigmoid-weighted linear units
for neural network function approximation in reinforcement learning,”
Neural Netw., vol. 107, pp. 3–11, Nov. 2018.
[76] B. Le Saux, N. Yokoya, R. Hansch, and S. Prasad, “2018 IEEE
GRSS data fusion contest: Multimodal land use classification [technical
committees],” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 52–54,
Mar. 2018.
[77] J. Yang, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “From center to surrounding:
An interactive learning framework for hyperspectral image classification,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 197, pp. 145–166,
Mar. 2023.
[78] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–19.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuit
and system from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery with the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently a Full Professor with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. His
research interests include remote sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remote
sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, please refer
to: https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/en/index.html

Yuexi Yao received the B.E. degree in intelligent
science and technology from Wuhan Institute of
Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2023. She is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science and
technology with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry
of Education, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
Her research interests include image understanding, hyperspectral image classification, and deep
learning.

5510319

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include computational
intelligence and image understanding.

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is currently a Professor with the Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine
learning, and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.

Yuqun Yang received the B.S. degree in information
and computing science from Xi’an University of
Technology, Xi’an, China, in 2019, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and technology from
Xidian University, Xi’an, in 2024.
He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with
the Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China. His research interests include deep
learning, change detection, and image segmentation,
among others.

Bo Wang received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from Xidian University, Xi’an,
China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in instrument
science and technology from Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, in 2023.
He is currently an Associate Researcher with
the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. His research interests include
medical image segmentation, surgical planning, and
the application of artificial intelligence in medical
instrumentation.

Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of Ministry of Education of China. He has authored or
co-authored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include
signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet
theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is also a member of the IEEE Xian Section Executive Committee
and an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial Intelligence. He is the Chairperson for the Awards and Recognition
Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:51:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

