IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 20, 2023

4004905

Unsupervised SAR Image Change Detection Based
on Feature Fusion of Information Transfer
Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE, Desheng Li, Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yuqun Yang, Student Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) image change
detection is a hot but challenging task due to SAR images’
complex contents and inherent speckle noises. The expected
change detection methods should reduce the influence of speckle
noises, obtain the discriminative feature representations, and
generate accurate change maps simultaneously. To these ends,
we propose a new SAR image change detection method named
feature fusion of information transfer network (FFITN). First,
we develop a hybrid convolution block (HCB) to depress the
speckle noise impacts and explore the valuable information from
SAR images. Thus, the feature extraction module (FEM) is constructed to obtain the multilevel features. Then, an information
transfer module (ITM) is proposed to capture the salient regions
from various aspects. Also, the salient knowledge is transferred
among features at different levels to enhance their discrimination.
Next, a self-attention-based feature fusion module (SAFFM)
is introduced to fuse various features. Finally, a change map
generation module (CMGM) with the clustering algorithm and
specific loss functions is designed to produce the pseudo labels
and change maps. Experimental results on three public SAR
datasets demonstrate the model’s effectiveness. Our source codes
are available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/FFITN.
Index Terms— Change detection, synthetic aperture radar
(SAR) images.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the development of sensor technology, acquiring remote sensing (RS) images have become more
convenient. The abundant RS images bring rich information to scholars for the study of our planet, despite the
intractable challenges in understanding them. As an important
RS interpretation task, RS change detection is always an active
research topic that aims to identify the changes that occurred
in multitemporal RS images, which cover the same geographic
areas and are collected at different times [1], [2]. Among
diverse RS images, synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images are
popular in change detection tasks because SAR sensors can
work on all-day and all-weather [3].
In general, SAR image change detection methods can
be divided into three categories according to whether prior
Manuscript received 1 December 2022; revised 20 January 2023;
accepted 9 April 2023. Date of publication 13 April 2023; date of current
version 26 April 2023. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62171332 and Grant
62276197 and in part by the Xidian University-SenseTime Joint Laboratory of
Smart Health Care under Grant A202203. (Corresponding author: Xu Tang.)
The authors are with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial
Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071, China (e-mail:
tangxu128@gmail.com).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2023.3266891, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LGRS.2023.3266891

knowledge is used or not [4], including supervised, semisupervised, and unsupervised approaches. The supervised
methods (e.g., [5]) have achieved satisfactory results. However,
they need many labeled data, which is harsh or even impractical in the SAR community. Accordingly, some researchers pay
attention to developing semisupervised models [6]. Although
these models can mitigate the burden of collecting the labeled
data, the semi-supervised assumptions limit their applicability.
In contrast to the above methods, unsupervised methods do
not need labeled data and are not restricted to specific prerequisites. Therefore, they are more practical. There are three
steps in a basic unsupervised SAR image change detection
method, i.e., SAR image preprocessing, difference image (DI)
generation, and DI analysis [7]. Here, we suppose that the
multitemporal SAR images have been preprocessed, and our
mission is to produce and investigate the DIs for the binary
change maps deeply. In the beginning, hand-crafted visual
features and conventional machine learning techniques are
popular in DI generation and analysis. However, those methods cannot reach what we expect since the hand-crafted
features cannot represent the complex contents within SAR
images [8].
Recently, unsupervised SAR image change detection techniques have made rapid progress with the appearance
of deep learning, especially convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). For instance, a symmetric convolutional coupling
network (SCCN) was developed in [9] to address SAR image
change detection. Based on the denoising auto-encoder, SCCN
uses convolution operations to learn the rich features from
SAR images. Then, the change maps are generated by the
hierarchical coupling layers. There are two free parameters in
SCCN, which should be tuned carefully for different testing
data. Also, the encouraging experimental results counted on
two pairs of bi-temporal SAR images (collected by Radarsat-2
and Landsat-7 satellites) confirm the strength of SCCN. Dong
et al. [10] proposed a multiscale self-attention deep clustering
model for SAR image change detection (MSDC). By introducing the clustering technique, CNN, and attention mechanism,
the change detection results can be obtained. There are eight
free parameters in MSDC, and the usefulness of MSDC is
verified by seven bi-temporal SAR image sets, which are
produced by the Radarsat-2, ESR-1, ESR-2, and TerraSAR-X
satellites. A convolutional-wavelet neural network (CWNN)
was proposed in [11] for sea ice change detection using SAR
images. After generating the DIs, the CNN embedded with
the complex wavelet pooling is used to produce the final
change maps. Two free parameters influence the CWNN’s

1558-0571 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:59:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4004905

IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 20, 2023

performance, and two SAR datasets (collected by the European
Space Agency’s ENVISAT satellite) are adopted to illustrate
the effectiveness of CWNN. Qu et al. [12] presented a dualdomain network (DDNet) to deal with SAR image change
detection. DDNet first maps SAR images into the frequency
domain, then a multiregion convolution module is used to
obtain the change maps. The SAR images’ frequency and
spatial information can be utilized in this way. Three SAR
images generated by the Radarsat-2 and ENVISAT satellites
are used to evaluate DDNet. The patch size and other free
settings would impact the behavior of DDNet directly. In addition, the spatial sizes of testing SAR images used in the above
literature are varied from 256 to 512 approximately.
Although the above deep learning-based methods have
succeeded in their applications, there are still some challenges in SAR image change detection. First, the existing
methods usually depress the speckle noises by the simple
operators (such as logarithmic ratios) in the DI generation
process [1]. However, their negative influences are not fully
considered during feature learning, which would decrease
the effectiveness of obtained feature representations. Second,
the current models are habituated to leveraging the multilevel features obtained by CNNs to explore the complex
contents within SAR images [4]. Although it is feasible,
they do not pay attention to the salient clues within these
features, which limit the functions of the multilayer features in
change detection. Third, the feature fusion schemes in change
detection networks are always concatenation and summation
[13]. However, these straightforward fusion strategies fail
to maximize the potential of learned features for change
tasks.
To meet the above challenges, this letter develops a feature fusion of information transfer network (FFITN). FFITN
consists of a feature extraction module (FEM), an information
transfer module (ITM), a self-attention-based feature fusion
module (SAFFM), and a change map generation module
(CMGM). FEM is developed to extract multilevel features
from SAR images and depress the influence of speckle noise.
ITM aims to discover the salient regions at different levels
and transfer the salient messages from high- to low-level,
so that the mutual influence between different features can
be considered. SAFFM is designed to fuse multilevel features
using a self-attention strategy to maximize the final features’
function for change detection tasks. CMGM focuses on generating the binary change map by the simple threshold clustering
algorithm. Our FFITN can be trained in an unsupervised
manner through specific loss functions.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as
follows.
1) An unsupervised SAR image change detection network (FFITN) is developed in this letter, which considers the speckle noise and multiscale properties of SAR
images simultaneously to ensure the quality of change
detection results.
2) By introducing the octave convolution [14], a hierarchical FEM is developed. It can capture multilayer information from SAR images and mitigate the disturbance
of speckle noise.

Fig. 1.

Framework of the FFITN.

3) A salient information discovery and transferring module
is constructed to exploit the crucial clues hidden in
multilayer features. Thus, their discrimination can be
enhanced.
4) A delicate feature fusion module is proposed based
on the self-attention mechanism, which can enlarge
contributions from multilayer features for downstream
change detection.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overall Framework
The framework of the proposed FFITN is shown in Fig. 1.
Suppose there are bi-temporal SAR images I1 and I2 with the
spatial size of H × W . First, similar to [15], they and their DI
D (obtained by the log-ratio operator) are concatenated to input
FEM for generating a set of feature maps {F1 , F2 , F3 , F4 , F5 }
with the consideration of depressing the speckle noise. On the
one hand, FEM can explore the rich land covers and hidden
temporal clues from the original SAR images to ensure the
discrimination of the obtained feature maps. On the other hand,
D provides the primary change clues, which can help FEM
obtain the change detection preferred feature maps. Then,
those feature maps are fed into IFM for the enhanced feature
maps {F′1 , F′2 , F′3 , F′4 , F′5 }. The enhanced feature maps contain
hierarchical information due to the spatial attention mechanism
and information transfer strategy. Next, SAFFM combines the
contributions of multilevel feature maps to generate the final
feature F, which is rich in contextual knowledge hidden in
SAR images. Finally, a 1 × 1 convolution and the hierarchical
fuzzy c-means algorithm are used to produce the output O and
its pseudo labels P L .
B. Feature Extraction Module
To ensure our FEM can obtain valuable knowledge from
SAR images while reducing the negative influence of speckle
noises, we introduce the octave convolution and develop the
hybrid convolution block (HCB) as the basic unit of FEM.
The octave convolution divides the feature maps into low- and
high-frequency parts and convolves them separately, followed
by low- and high-frequency information interaction. Owing to
the specific mechanism of the octave convolution, the speckle
noises mixed in the high spatial frequency part of SAR images
can be depressed [10]. As shown in Fig. 2, there are two
3 × 3 regular convolutional layers and two 1 × 1 octave
convolutional layers in HCB. The regular convolutions focus

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:59:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: UNSUPERVISED SAR IMAGE CHANGE DETECTION BASED ON FEATURE FUSION

Fig. 2.

Structure of HCB.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 3.

4004905

Structure of ITM.

on capturing helpful information, and the octave convolutions
aim at discovering speckle noises and decreasing their impacts.
In this way, the effectiveness of the final features can be
guaranteed. Note that we do not apply additional operations
on the high- and low-frequency parts generated in octave
convolutional layers to avoid causing interference clues (highfrequency) and information loss (low-frequency).
Our FEM links five HCBs serially. When SAR images and
their DI are input, the first HCB will be conducted to generate
the feature map C1 . Then, C1 will be fed into HCB2 to
produce C2 . Similarly, we can get various immediate feature
maps {C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , C5 } corresponding to different levels.
Their channels are 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512. Then, they are
mapped into {P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 , P5 } by five 1 × 1 convolutions,
whose channels are 32. Next, to improve the discrimination
of feature maps, they are fed into a top-down dense connected feature pyramid [16]. Finally, five 1 × 1 convolutions
are adopted to transform {P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 , P5 } into the feature
maps {F1 , F2 , F3 , F4 , F5 }, whose channels are also 32. These
feature maps can represent SAR images’ multiscale contents.
Note that the data’s spatial size would be halved after HCB.
However, we change the stride value of HCB1 to ensure the
spatial size of F1 is the same as the original SAR images.
C. Information Transfer Module
When the multilayer feature maps {F1 , F2 , F3 , F4 , F5 } are
obtained, the next step for change detection is to fuse them in
general. Nevertheless, considering the messages within different feature maps are different and complementary, we develop
ITM in this section to capture the salient clues from each
feature map and transfer them from high- to low-level for
enhancing the feature maps. The structure of ITM is shown in
Fig. 3. First, ITM conducts 1 × 1 convolution and the sigmoid
function on Fi , i = 2, . . . , 5 for obtaining the spatial attention
scores Atti , i = 2, . . . , 5. These scores reflect the salient
information for change detection tasks. Second, ITM leverages
the simple dot product and addition operations to propagate
the salient scores and original knowledge from deep to shallow
levels. On the one hand, the low-level feature maps (rich in
textual information) can be supplemented by the semantic
knowledge within the high-level feature maps. On the other

Structure of SAFFM.

hand, due to the introduction of the octave convolution, the
high-level feature maps are more robust to speckle noise than
the low-level feature maps. Therefore, transferring the salient
information from high- to low-level feature maps could ensure
that the shallow features are also robust to speckle noise.
D. Self-Attention-Based Feature Fusion Module
So far, we have obtained enhanced feature maps
{F′1 , F′2 , F′3 , F′4 , F′5 }. Instead of fusing them by simple concatenation and summation, we develop SAFFM to integrate
their contributions and mine the contextual information within
SAR images in a self-attention manner. As exhibited in Fig. 4,
SAFFM first up-samples F′5 and multiplies it by the transposed
F′4 to get the self-attention score Att4 & 5 . Meanwhile, SAFFM
down-samples F′1 and multiplies it by the transposed F′2 to get
another self-attention score Att1 & 2 . Second, the self-attention
score Att4 & 5 is combined with F′3 by the up-sampling, dot
production, and addition operations to get F3–5 . At the same
time, Att1 & 2 and F3–5 are merged to get F̂ by the downsampling, dot production, and addition operations. Finally,
F̂ is up-sampled and added to F′1 for the final feature F.
Here, we want to explain the rationality of the SAFFM’s
operations. First, the high-level feature maps (F′4 and F′5 )
are rich in semantics, and the low-level feature maps (F′1 and
F′2 ) incorporate sufficient textual information. The attention
scores obtained by them remain important semantic and textual
messages. The mid-level feature map F′3 can be regarded as
a transition from low- to high-level features, which involves
intermediate clues. Thus, when we add semantic and textual
attention scores to F′3 , the produced F̂ encloses all paramount
information of the multilayer features. Second, considering
the importance of changed areas’ edges, we combine F̂ and
F′1 at last. This way, more detailed edge information can be
integrated for change detection.
E. Change Map Generation Module
After FEM, ITM, and SAFFM, the bi-temporal SAR images
and their DI have been mapped into the feature map F with
a size of H × W × 32. Now, GCGM is developed to
generate the change map. In particular, CMGM first uses a
1 × 1 convolution to produce the output O ∈ RW ×H ×1 .
Then, the hierarchical fuzzy c-means algorithm is adopted
to generate the corresponding pseudo labels P L ∈ RW ×H ×1 ,
which can be used to train our FFITN. Here, we suppose
three clusters are in P L , including the unchanged cluster u ,
changed cluster c , and uncertain cluster i . Only the pixels

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:59:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4004905

Fig. 5.

IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS, VOL. 20, 2023

Testing datasets. (a) Bern. (b) Yellow River I. (c) Yellow River IV.

belonging to u and c participate in the training procedure.
Here, we select the contrast loss as our loss function. Its
definition is
Loss = Lossneg + Losspos
P N1
R1 · (1 − y) · d2
Lossneg = i=1
N1 + N2
P N2
2
R
0 · y · max(m − d, 0)
Losspos = i=1
(1)
N1 + N2
where N1 and N2 represent the numbers of changed and
unchanged pixels, y ∈ {0, 1} is the pseudo label, max(·) is
the maximum value function, d indicates the feature value
corresponding to the changed point, m has the same shape
as d and is filled with the value m, m is the upper boundary
parameter of the changed pixel value, and R1 and R0 represent
the ratio of pixels with labels 1 and 0 to the total training
samples, which are used to alleviate the imbalance issue.
There are two points we want to explain further. First,
the parameters of FFITN are initialized randomly. FFITN’s
training process is divided into two phases to optimize them
adequately without any labeled data, i.e., warm-up and training. P L is generated by D and O in the warm-up and training
phases, respectively. Second, when our FFITN is trained,
we can use it to obtain O in the testing process. Then, instead
of the hierarchical fuzzy c-means algorithm, a simple threshold
binarization scheme is selected to generate the change map.
III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
A. Dataset Introduction and Experimental Settings
We select three datasets [3] to verify our FFITN comprehensively. The first is the Bern dataset [see Fig. 5(a)], which was
captured by the European Remote Sensing 2 spaceborne sensor
in April and May 1999. The bi-temporal SAR images’ sizes
are 301 × 301. The last two datasets are parts of the Yellow
River Estuary dataset, which was collected by RADARSAT-2
in June 2008 and June 2009, and we record them Yellow
River I [see Fig. 5(b)] and Yellow River IV [see Fig. 5(c)]
in this letter. Their spatial sizes are 257 × 289 (Yellow River
I) and 306 × 291 (Yellow River IV). All experiments reported
here are compiled by the Pytorch platform using a workstation
equipped with GeForce RTX 2080 Ti and 11G video memory.
We select the Adam algorithm to train our FFITN. The
learning rate and training epochs are set to 0.001 and 200.
In the first 100 epochs, we use 10% pseudo labels generated
by the hierarchical fuzzy c-means algorithm to accomplish
the training. In the rest 100 epochs, 60% of pseudo labels
participate in the training process. To obtain the numerical
performance of FFITN, we choose five common evaluation
criteria [10], including false positive (FP), false negative (FN),
overall error (OE), percent correct classification (PCC), and
Kappa coefficient (KC).

Fig. 6.

PCC values of FFITN with various free parameters. (a) m. (b) t.
TABLE I
A BLATION S TUDY OF FFITN U SING PCC VALUES (%)

B. Parameter Analysis
As mentioned in Section II, two free parameters should
be set in advance, i.e., the upper boundary parameter m in
(1) and the threshold t used in the testing process. Here,
we change their values one by one to decide their optimal
values. The values of m are varied from 1.0 to 3.0 with an
interval of 0.2, and the values of t are fluctuated within a range
of [0.1, 1.0]. The PCC values of FFITN based on different
empirical parameters are shown in Fig. 6(a). We can find
that FFITN performs steadily on the Bern and Yellow River I
datasets with various m. However, there is a distinct fluctuation
for the Yellow River IV dataset, and the optimal performance
is achieved when m = 1.6. The different behavior of FFITN
counted on three datasets is mainly caused by the diverse
category and intensity changes. In the rest of the experiments,
we empirically set m = 1.6. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the PCC
values are increased when the value of t is changed from 0.1 to
0.5, and then the FFITN’s behavior tends to be stable. The
optimal values appear at t = 0.8 (Bern), t = 0.6 (Yellow River
I), and t = 0.5 (Yellow River IV). This demonstrates that our
model’s outputs follow a relatively clear changed/unchanged
distribution. According to the results, we use the optimal t in
the following experiments.
C. Ablation Study
In this section, we construct three networks to study the
contributions of different modules to our FFITN. They are:
1) Net1: FEM + CMGM; 2) Net2: FEM + ITM + CMGM;
3) Net3: FEM + SAFFM + CMGM; and 4) Net4:
FEM + ITM + SAFFM + CMGM. Net1 can be regarded
as the baseline, which only contains the feature learning and
change map generation operations. Based on Net1, we add
ITM and SAFFM to construct Net2 and Net 3, respectively.
Net4 is actually our FFITN. The performance of different
networks counted by PCC is summarized in Table I. From
observing these results, we find that each module provides
positive contributions to FFITN. Taking the Yellow River I
dataset as an example. The PCC value of Net1 is 94.28%.
When we add ITM or SAFFM, the PCC value can be
improved to different degrees. This implies that the mined
salient knowledge and the self-attention fusion strategy are
good to change detection. When all modules are integrated,

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:59:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: UNSUPERVISED SAR IMAGE CHANGE DETECTION BASED ON FEATURE FUSION

4004905

TABLE II
C HANGE D ETECTION R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS C OUNTED ON T HREE DATASETS

Net4 achieves the best performance. Apart from the above
ablation study, the significance of the octave convolution, the
benefits of stacking DI with SAR images, and the function of
our model on speckle noise depression are discussed in the
supplementary material.
D. Performance Comparison
To verify our model objectively, the following five methods
are selected, including DDNet [12], SAFNet [17], MsCapsNet
[5], MSDC [10], GKSNet [18], and CAA [19]. Table II
shows the numerical results of different methods. We can
easily find that our FFITN achieves the best performance
in most cases from observing them. The values of FN and
OE of FFITN are the lowest among all methods. Also, the
PCC and KC values of FFITN are the largest among all
methods. Taking KC values of Yellow River IV as examples,
in comparison to other methods, the enhancements achieved
by FFITN are 5.47% (DDNet), 6.01% (SAFNet), 4.54%
(MsCapsNet), 3.42% (MSDC), 4.65% (GKSNet), and 11.27%
(CAA). We also count the training and testing time costs of
FFITN in Table II. Although our training times are longer than
other methods, the inference times of FFITN are the shortest.
Due to space limitations, the various change detection maps
are shown in the supplementary material. In addition, we also
select two other larger datasets to evaluate FFITN, and the
results are exhibited in the supplementary material.
IV. C ONCLUSION
This letter presents an unsupervised change detection
method (FFITN) for SAR images. It consists of four modules,
and their function is to depress the noises and extract useful
information from SAR images, enhance the discrimination of
learned features, complete the feature fusion, and produce the
final change maps. The positive experimental results counted
on three public datasets confirm that our method is helpful
for SAR image change detection. Also, the following points
can be obtained. The first one is that the octave convolution is
able to depress the speckle noises hidden in SAR images. The
second one is that salient information is beneficial to change
detection. The last one is the self-attention mechanism is good
at fusing various knowledge. These three points can also be
found in the literature [10] and [17].
Even so, FFITN still has some shortcomings. First, training
FFITN is time-consuming due to the complex structure and
clustering operation. Second, the FP values of our model
need to be better compared with some existing methods. How
to address the limitations mentioned above is our further
work.

R EFERENCES
[1] D. Wen et al., “Change detection from very-high-spatial-resolution optical remote sensing images: Methods, applications, and future directions,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 68–101, Dec. 2021.
[2] X. Tang et al., “An unsupervised remote sensing change detection
method based on multiscale graph convolutional network and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5609715.
[3] W. Zhang, L. Jiao, F. Liu, S. Yang, and J. Liu, “Adaptive contourlet
fusion clustering for SAR image change detection,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 31, pp. 2295–2308, 2022.
[4] Z. Lv, T. Liu, J. A. Benediktsson, and N. Falco, “Land cover change
detection techniques: Very-high-resolution optical images: A review,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 44–63, Mar. 2022.
[5] Y. Gao, F. Gao, J. Dong, and H.-C. Li, “SAR image change detection
based on multiscale capsule network,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 484–488, Mar. 2021.
[6] H.-C. Li, G. Yang, W. Yang, Q. Du, and W. J. Emery, “Deep nonsmooth
nonnegative matrix factorization network with semi-supervised learning
for SAR image change detection,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 160, pp. 167–179, Feb. 2020.
[7] W. Zhang, L. Jiao, F. Liu, S. Yang, W. Song, and J. Liu, “Sparse feature
clustering network for unsupervised SAR image change detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5226713.
[8] J. Wang, T. Zhao, and X. Jiang, “Unsupervised multi-look SAR image
change detection driven by dual-layer graph with intensity and texture
attributes,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[9] J. Liu, M. Gong, K. Qin, and P. Zhang, “A deep convolutional coupling
network for change detection based on heterogeneous optical and
radar images,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 545–559, Dec. 2016.
[10] H. Dong, W. Ma, L. Jiao, F. Liu, and L. Li, “A multiscale self-attention
deep clustering for change detection in SAR images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5207016.
[11] F. Gao, X. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Dong, and S. Wang, “Sea ice change
detection in SAR images based on convolutional-wavelet neural networks,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1240–1244,
Aug. 2019.
[12] X. Qu, F. Gao, J. Dong, Q. Du, and H.-C. Li, “Change detection in
synthetic aperture radar images using a dual-domain network,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[13] Y. Afaq and A. Manocha, “Analysis on change detection techniques
for remote sensing applications: A review,” Ecol. Informat., vol. 63,
Jul. 2021, Art. no. 101310.
[14] Y. Chen et al., “Drop an octave: Reducing spatial redundancy in convolutional neural networks with octave convolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 3435–3444.
[15] R. Wang, L. Wang, X. Wei, J.-W. Chen, and L. Jiao, “Dynamic graphlevel neural network for SAR image change detection,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[16] Y. Yang et al., “AR2 Det: An accurate and real-time rotational one-stage
ship detector in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5605414.
[17] Y. Gao, F. Gao, J. Dong, Q. Du, and H.-C. Li, “Synthetic aperture radar
image change detection via Siamese adaptive fusion network,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14,
pp. 10748–10760, 2021.
[18] J. Wang, F. Gao, J. Dong, S. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Change detection from
synthetic aperture radar images via graph-based knowledge supplement
network,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 1823–1836, 2022.
[19] L. T. Luppino et al., “Code-aligned autoencoders for unsupervised change detection in multimodal remote sensing images,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, May 12, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3172183.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:59:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

