IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

5615814

WNet: W-Shaped Hierarchical Network for
Remote-Sensing Image Change Detection
Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE, Tianxiang Zhang, Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu, Member, IEEE, and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Change detection (CD) is a hot research topic in the
remote-sensing (RS) community. With the increasing availability
of high-resolution (HR) RS images, there is a growing demand
for CD models with high detection accuracy and generalization
ability. In other words, the CD models are expected to work
well for various HRRS images. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have been dominated in HRRS image CD due to their
excellent information extraction and nonlinear fitting capabilities.
However, they are not skilled in modeling long-range contexts
hidden in HRRS images, which limits their performance in CD
tasks more or less. Recently, the Transformer, which is good
at extracting global context dependencies, has become popular
in the RS community. Nevertheless, detailed local knowledge
receives insufficient emphasis in common Transformers. Considering the above discussion, we combine CNNs and Transformers
and propose a new W-shaped dual-Siamese branch hierarchical
network for HRRS image CD named W-shaped hierarchical
network (WNet). WNet first incorporates a Siamese CNN and
a Siamese Transformer into a dual-branch encoder to extract
multilevel local fine-grained features and global long-range contextual dependencies. Also, we introduce deformable ideas into
the Siamese CNN and Transformer to make WNet understand
the critical and irregular areas within HRRS images. Second,
the difference enhancement module (DEM) is developed and
embedded into the encoder to produce the difference feature
maps at different levels. Using simple pixel-wise subtraction
and channel-wise concatenation, the changes of interest and
irrelevant changes can be highlighted and suppressed in a
learnable manner. Next, the multilevel difference feature maps
are fused stage by stage by CNN–Transformer fusion modules
(CTFMs), which are the basic units of the decoder in WNet.
In CTFMs, the local, global, and cross-scale clues are taken into
account to ensure the integrity of information. Finally, a simple
classifier is constructed and added at the top of the decoder to
predict the change maps. Positive experimental results counted
Manuscript received 23 April 2023; revised 17 June 2023; accepted 13 July
2023. Date of publication 18 July 2023; date of current version 1 August 2023.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62171332 and Grant 62276197; in part by the Fund
of National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Remote Sensing
Information and Imagery Analysis, Beijing Research Institute of Uranium
Geology under Grant 6142A010301; and in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities, Innovation Fund of Xidian University.
(Corresponding author: Jingjing Ma.)
Xu Tang, Tianxiang Zhang, Jingjing Ma, Xiangrong Zhang, and
Licheng Jiao are with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence,
Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com;
jjma@ieee.org).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of the Ministry of Education, School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing 210093, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3296383

on four public datasets demonstrate that the proposed WNet
is helpful in HRRS image CD tasks. Our source codes are
available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/Remote-SensingImage-Change-Detection/tree/main/WNet.
Index Terms— Change detection (CD), convolutional neural
network (CNN), Transformer.

I. I NTRODUCTION

C

HANGE detection (CD) is one of the significant topics
in remote-sensing (RS) image processing, which aims
at detecting changes of interest in bitemporal images covering the same regions [1]. It can be used in various RS
applications, such as land cover recognition [2], urban expansion estimation [3], disaster assessment [4], and agriculture
monitoring [5]. With the development of sensors, many highresolution (HR) RS images can be generated daily. These
images bring profitable information and formidable challenges
for CD tasks at the same time [6]. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1, due to various environmental conditions, the inevitable
irrelevant changes would disturb the CD results negatively [7].
Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 2, resolutions of HRRS
images are diverse and varied, which places higher demands on
the generalization ability of the CD model [8]. In other words,
it is difficult for a model to perform well in different HRRS
images with various scales. Therefore, developing specific CD
methods for HRRS images is necessary and urgent.
Nowadays, with the rapid development of deep learning [9],
[10], [11], [12], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
dominated the HRRS image CD community. Benefiting from
the strong capabilities of feature learning and nonlinear fitting,
many CNN-based CD methods have been proposed for HRRS
images and achieved success in their applications [13], [14],
[15]. Even so, the researchers found that CNNs are not good at
exploring the context information and discovering the salient
areas within HRRS images. To mitigate these problems and
improve the CD results, some works stack more convolution
layers [16], [17] and others embed advanced techniques (such
as visual attention mechanisms [18], [19]) into CNNs [20],
[21], [22]. Although they perform well, these approaches are
not proficient in modeling the long-range context dependencies
hidden in HRRS images, which are important clues for CD
tasks.
The current Transformer [23], especially the visual Transformer (ViT) [24], has effectively solved the shortcomings
of CNNs mentioned above. With the excellent ability to

1558-0644 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 1. Three irrelevant changes in three pairs of bitemporal HRRS images are
caused by nonbuildings changes in building CD (the first row), illumination
condition change (the second row), and seasonal change (the third row),
respectively. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Ground truth. (d) Possible change
prediction map.

Fig. 2. Resolutions of the three sets of temporal HRRS images are 0.5, 0.3,
and 0.2 m/pixel from top to bottom. Although the changed objects in them are
both buildings, their scales are distinctly varied, which requires the CD model
to have a high generalization ability. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Ground
truth.

explore long-range context dependencies, the Transformer has
been gradually applied to HRRS image CD tasks. Sufficient
and positive experimental results confirm its effectiveness
in HRRS image CD tasks [25], [26], [27], [28]. While the
Transformer offers great potential in CD, there is still room
for improvement. First, although the global contexts hidden in
HRRS images can be captured by the Transformer, the local
fine-grained messages do not get the attention they deserve.
This would impact the CD results negatively. Second, most
Transformer-based models would divide input HRRS images
into patches using the simple grid scheme for downstream
operations. However, these regular patches would disturb the
continuity and geometry of complex land covers, which goes
against the CD’s targets.
Based on the above discussion, we found that CNNs and
Transformers are the two complementary tools for HRRS
image CD. Therefore, we propose a W-shaped hierarchical network (WNet) in this article to deal with HRRS
image CD tasks by integrating the superiorities of CNNs
and Transformers. First, WNet consists of parallel CNN and
Transformer branches. They aim to learn the fine-grained

local messages and long-range context dependencies from
HRRS images. Using those features simultaneously is beneficial to identify the changing objects with various scales.
Furthermore, we embed the deformable convolution [29],
[30] and deformable attention mechanism [31] into CNN
and Transformer branches to weaken the adverse effects
of fixed convolution kernels and regular patches. Third,
a difference enhancement module (DEM) is developed to
emphasize the change information. This way, the irrelevant
changes caused by the environment can be discovered, which
is good for reducing false alarm rates. Finally, we design
a CNN–Transformer fusion module (CTFM) based on an
improved channel attention strategy [18]. CTFM focuses on
enriching the channel clues and integrating the local, global,
and cross-scale features. As a whole, the dual-Siamese branch
structure of WNet ensures that it can obtain suitable feature
representations to detect the change information hidden in
bitemporal RS images collected under various environmental conditions. The introduction of deformable technologies
improves WNet’s generalization ability so that it works for
different HRRS images.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as
follows.
1) An end-to-end HRRS image CD model named WNet is
developed in this article. WNet is a hierarchical network
with a dual-Siamese branch encoder, which involves a
Siamese CNN and a Siamese Transformer. It aims to
capture local and global information from bitemporal
HRRS images simultaneously.
2) To enrich the WNet’s receptive fields, we introduce the
deformable ideas into the dual-Siamese branch encoder.
In this way, the limitations caused by the fixed convolutional kernel (in CNNs) and regular patch generation
(in Transformers) can be mitigated.
3) To highlight the changes of interest and suppress irrelevant changes, we develop DEM and embed it into
the dual-Siamese branch encoder. By combining simple
subtraction and concatenation operations, the difference
feature maps can be obtained in an efficient and learnable way.
4) To fuse diverse information, the CTFM is developed.
In CTFM, not only can the local, global, and cross-scale
messages be integrated, but also the channel-wise clues
are mined intensely. In this fashion, the integrity of final
features for change map generation can be guaranteed.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. The literature
related to CNN- and Transformer-based methods for RS
CD is reviewed in Section II. Then, the proposed method
is introduced in Section III. The experimental results and
discussion are given in Section IV. Finally, the conclusions
are summarized in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. CNN-Based Methods
The CNN has become a standard technique in the field of
HRRS image CD. Many CNN-based models have been proposed to address HRRS image CD tasks in recent years. In the

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: WNet: W-SHAPED HIERARCHICAL NETWORK FOR RS IMAGE CD

5615814

beginning, researchers are used to introducing some classical
CNNs (such as VGG [32] and ResNet [33]) to be the feature
extractor for the final change maps [34], [35], [36]. Then,
some semantic segmentation networks are used to deal with
HRRS image CD since the CD task can be regarded as a twoclass classification problem. For instance, Duadt et al. [37]
designed three CD networks for HRRS images based on
UNet [38]. Three models are named FC-EF, FC-Siam-conc,
and FC-Siam-diff according to ways of input and fusion. The
positive results confirm that UNet and full convolutions are
useful to HRRS image CD. Another example of the UNetbased model was proposed in [39]. Besides adopting UNet,
a feature fusion strategy is developed to fuse the multilevel
features. In this fashion, the multiscale information within
HRRS images can be mined to ensure the quality of change
maps. As the study progressed, the researchers found that the
Siamese architecture is more suitable for CD than the singlebranch structure. Thus, a growing number of HRRS image
CD networks with the Siamese style have been presented [40],
[41], [42].
Although the methods mentioned above have succeeded, the
shortcomings of CNNs still limit their performance, that is, the
fixed convolutional kernels are not able to capture the contextual information and emphasize crucial areas within HRRS
images for CD. To address these issues, many studies [43],
[44], [45] have incorporated visual attention mechanisms [46]
and altered advanced strategies to improve the performance of
CNN-based CD networks. Fang et al. [43] proposed a densely
connected Siamese network named SNUNet, in which an
improved channel attention module (CAM) [18] is adopted
to discover the context information and enhance the discrimination of learned features. The compact information
transmission and adequate information representation enable
SNUNet to demonstrate excellent CD performance. Similarly,
a dual-branch multilevel intertemporal network was introduced
in [45], where a joint attention module is designed to exchange
bitemporal feature information for further generating difference features. Based on these features, favorable change maps
can be obtained by subtraction or concatenation. Apart from
including the attention mechanisms, some other studies focus
on enhancing or utilizing the boundaries of changed objects
to improve the CD performance of networks [47], [48], [49].

The encouraging results illustrate the effectiveness of ChangeFormer. Likewise, a U-shaped network (SwinSUNet) was
constructed in [56] based on the Swin Transformer (Swin-T)
[59]. SwinSUNet consists of an encoder, a fusion module,
and a decoder. Their units are all Swin-T blocks. In addition,
the skip connection strategy is added between the encoder
and the decoder, which further enhances the learned features.
Combining them, encouraging HRRS image CD results can
be generated with acceptable time costs. Although these
approaches demonstrate the potential of the Transformer in
HRRS image CD, the missing local detailed information
impacts their behavior negatively.
To mitigate the above problems, the models within the
second category pay attention to integrating the advantages
of CNNs and Transformers for HRRS image CD tasks [26],
[60], [61], [62], [63]. Chen et al. [60] proposed a bitemporal image Transformer (BIT) model for HRRS image CD,
in which the CNN and Transformer are linked in series. BIT
first leverages ResNet [33] to map bitemporal HRRS images
into different feature maps. Then, the original Transformer
block [24] is adopted to build the spatial–temporal context
within the features. The satisfying CD results imply the
success of the combination of CNNs and Transformers. Based
on BIT, another hybrid network was presented in [26] and
named TransUNetCD. Like BIT, the CNN and Transformer are
constructed serially to explore the local and global information
from HRRS images. Unlike BIT, TransUNetCD embeds this
combination into a UNet to improve performance. In contrast
to directly applying Transformers to process deep features
extracted by CNNs, Feng et al. [61] designed a dual-branch
network named ICIF-Net, where CNNs and Transformers
are placed in each branch. When bitemporal HRRS images
are input ICIF-Net, the CNN and Transformer blocks would
process them, respectively. Then, the CNN- and Transformerbased features are fused crosswise from intra- and interscale
aspects. Consequently, the local detailed and global context
knowledge hidden in HRRS images can be fully explored for
the final CD.

B. Transformer-Based Methods
Recently, ViT [50], [51], [52], [53], [54] has been
increasingly applied to HRRS image CD due to its specific characteristic, that is, the strong capacity to model the
global long-distance relations hidden in images. The current
Transformer-based CD methods can be broadly classified into
two categories. The methods within the first category embed
the existing Transformers into their models for discovering the
changes [55], [56], [57]. For example, Bandara and Patel [55]
proposed a ChangeFormer. It first uses the pyramid ViT
(PVT) [58] as the basic unit to construct a Siamese encoder
to learn valuable features from bitemporal HRRS images.
Then, a multilayer perception (MLP) decoder is developed
to complete the feature fusion and change map prediction.

III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overall Framework
The overall framework of our WNet is shown in Fig. 3,
which consists of a dual-branch encoder and a fusion decoder.
When we input two bitemporal HRRS images I1 ∈ R H ×W ×C
and I2 ∈ R H ×W ×C into WNet, they will be passed through
the dual-branch encoder first, which encloses a Siamese CNN
branch and a Siamese Transformer branch. Thus, the multilevel local fine-grained information {(Fi1 , Fi2 ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4}
and the global context dependencies {(Gi1 , Gi2 ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4}
can be generated. Meanwhile, the embedded DEMs are used
to produce the difference feature maps {F̃i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4}
and {G̃i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4}, in which the change information
of bitemporal HRRS images can be highlighted efficiently.
Then, the obtained difference feature maps are fed into the
fusion decoder, which is made up of CFTMs and a classifier,
to aggregate the various knowledge from CNN and Transformer branches and to generate the change map M ∈ R H ×W .

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 3. Framework of the proposed WNet. Multilevel features are extracted from bitemporal HRRS image pairs through Siamese CNN and Siamese
Transformer branches. Then, the difference feature maps are generated by DEMs at different stages. After that, the local, global, and cross-stage information
is fused using CTFMs stage by stage. Finally, a simple classifier is designed to generate change maps.

In addition, skip connections are applied to connect the
encoder and the decoder at different levels to ensure the
stability of WNet.
B. Dual-Siamese Branch Encoder
1) Difference Enhancement Module: The main components
of the dual-branch encoder are a Siamese CNN and a Siamese
Transformer. Both of them leverage DEM to generate difference feature maps at various levels. Thus, we first explain
DEM in this section. The structure of DEM is exhibited in
Fig. 4. Assume that the input data is two feature maps Z1 ∈
Rh×w×c and Z2 ∈ Rh×w×c corresponding to the bitemporal
feature maps. DEM first uses pixel-wise subtraction to obtain
the difference feature map ZDiff ∈ Rh×w×c . Then, the original
feature maps are concatenated with the difference feature map
at the channel-wise to get ZEN ∈ Rh×w×3c , in which the change
information can be highlighted. Finally, a 1 × 1 convolution
layer is applied on ZEN to further learn change information,
reduce the channel dimension, and produce the output ZDEM ∈
Rh×w×c . The above process can be formulated as
ZDEM = f Conv1×1 (ZEN )
ZEN = Concat(Z1 , Z2 ,

ZDiff ), ZDiff = |Z1 − Z2 |

(1)

where | · |, Concat(·), and f Conv1 × 1 (·) denote the absolute
value, channel-wise concatenation, and 1×1 convolution layer,
respectively.

Fig. 4.
Structure of DEM, which mainly contains pixel-wise subtract,
concatenation, and 1 × 1 convolution.

Here, pixel-wise subtraction can highlight highly divergent
changes in bitemporal feature maps, including changes of
interest and irrelevant changes. The channel-wise concatenation aims to add prior knowledge of change information to
bitemporal feature maps, which enhances the representation
of change information. Along with the subsequent 1 × 1 convolution and CTFM in the decoder, the changes of interest can
be gradually approximated, and the irrelevant changes can be
depressed.
2) Siamese CNN Branch: The backbone of our Siamese
CNN branch is ResNet18 [33]. It has four residual blocks, each
with two basic residual units (see Fig. 5). Every unit has two
3 × 3 convolutions, two batch normalization (BN) layers, and
two rectified linear units (ReLU) activation functions, which
are connected in a residual way. Although the residual blocks
have succussed in many applications, their performance in
HRRS image CD is also limited because the fixed and regular

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: WNet: W-SHAPED HIERARCHICAL NETWORK FOR RS IMAGE CD

5615814

Fig. 5. Architecture of the D-Residual block, which consists of a residual
block and a deformable residual unit. The residual block consists of two basic
residual units.

convolution kernels decrease their ability to explore the geometric characteristics of changed/unchanged areas. To mitigate
this issue, we introduce the deformable convolution [30] and
develop the deformable residual (D-Residual) block in this
section.
The key idea of the deformable convolution is to add
the direction clues into the convolutional kernels so that the
receptive field can be enriched. For an input feature map x,
the process of a normal convolution can be defined as
X
y( p) =
w( pn ) · x( pn )
(2)
pn ∈R

where R implies a regular grid, p represents a position
in R, and w denotes the convolutional kernel. To augment
the receptive field, the deformable convolution upgrades the
regular grid R by including a learnable offset 1 pn . Therefore,
the deformable convolution process can be formulated as
X
y( p) =
w( pn ) · x( pn + 1pn ).
(3)

Fig. 6.
Two components of the Transformer branch backbone, where
“W,” “SW,” and “D” denote “window,” “shift-window,” and “deformable,”
respectively. (a) Swin-T block. (b) DAT block.

the backbone of our Siamese Transformer branch. DAT can
effectively model global information while whittling down the
information loss caused by strict grids. Its primary components
are the Swin-T [59] and DAT blocks. Before introducing those
two blocks, we will first review the standard multihead selfattention (MSA) mechanism.
For a token embedding instance X ∈ Rn×c (where n and
c indicate the number and dimension of the embeddings,
respectively), the output of MSA (with h heads) is
MSA(X) = Concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O

(4)

where W O ∈ Rc×c represents a learnable projection matrix,
and Concat(·) means the concatenation function. The definition of the ith head in MSA is

pn ∈R

This way, the receptive field can be enlarged to an irregular
range controlled by the offset locations pn +1 pn . More details
of the deformable convolution can be found in [29] and [30].
The structure of the D-Residual block is shown in Fig. 5.
It contains a residual block, a 3 × 3 convolution, a
3 × 3 deformable convolution, a BN layer, and a ReLU activation. Also, the residual block and other parts are connected in a
skipped manner. Based on the D-Residual block, our Siamese
CNN branch is developed hierarchically. Particularly, this
branch has two identical CNNs, each of which has four stages
embedded D-Residual blocks. Like ResNet18, a 7 × 7 convolution and a max pooling layer are added before Stage 1 for
downsampling. The downsampling process in other stages is
achieved by setting the stride of the first 3 × 3 convolution
in the first basic residual unit to 2. Furthermore, two CNNs
are connected by DEMs at different stages. Consequently,
after passing the bitemporal HRRS images I1 ∈ R H ×W ×C and
I2 ∈ R H ×W ×C through the Siamese CNN branch, we can get
four sets of feature maps {(Fi1 , Fi2 ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4} and four
difference feature maps {F̃i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4}. Their sizes are
H/2i+1 × W/2i+1 × Ci , where C1 = 64, C2 = 128, C3 = 256,
and C4 = 512. These feature maps represent the complex local
patterns and capture subtle changes between bitemporal HRRS
images.
3) Siamese Transformer Branch: To capture the global
context dependencies hidden in HRRS images, we introduce the deformable attention Transformer (DAT) [31] as

headi = Att(Qi , Ki , Vi )
Qi = XWiQ ,

Ki = XWiK , Vi = XWiV

(5)

where Qi ∈ Rn×c/ h , Ki ∈ Rn×c/ h , and Vi ∈ Rn×c/ h represent
query, key, and value of X ∈ Rn×c in the ith head, respectively,
WiQ , WiK , and WiV imply three learnable projection matrixes,
and Att(·) denotes the self-attention function, whose definition
is


QKT
V
(6)
Att(Q, K, V) = Softmax √
dhead
where dhead = c/ h indicates the dimension of the selfattention head, and Softmax(·) represents the softmax function.
A common Transformer block can be developed by inserting
a layer normalization (LN) before MSA and adding an LN
layer and an MLP layer after MSA.
Considering the high computational costs of the common
Transformer block, the Swin-T block was constructed in [59].
Its structure is shown in Fig. 6(a). A Swin-T block consists of two Transformer blocks. In the first Transformer
block, a window attention strategy is introduced to replace
MSA. It aims to divide the input feature map into multiple
nonoverlapping windows and apply MSA to each window.
We record it as W-MSA. In this fashion, the computational
costs can be whittled down dramatically. In addition, to further
analyze the relations between various windows, a shift-window
mechanism (SW-MSA) is used to replace MSA in the second

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Transformer block. SW-MSA can be regarded as a crosswindow connection scheme, and its attention function can be
formulated as


QKT
+B V
(7)
SW-Att(Q, K, V) = Softmax √
dhead
where B denotes the relative position bias caused by the shift
operations. By modeling global connectivity among different
windows, SW-MSA could ensure that the contextual messages
within the feature map can be fully explored.
To ensure the self-attention module could concern the
important and capricious areas in the input data, the DAT
block was proposed in [31], whose structure is shown in
Fig. 6(b). Like the Swin-T block, there are two Transformer
blocks in the DAT block. Also, the MSA mechanism in the
first Transformer block is changed into W-MSA. For the
second Transformer block, the MSA layer is supplanted with
the deformable MSA (D-MSA). Inspired by the deformable
convolution [29], D-MSA establishes an offset subnetwork to
learn offsets. The subnetwork encompasses a 5 × 5 depthwise convolution [64], a Gaussian error linear unit (GeLU)
activation, and a 1 × 1 convolution. The learned offsets can
guide the attention module to pay attention to the informative
areas (e.g., change objects). Thus, the feature learning capacity
can be improved. The attention function in D-MSA is defined
as
!

QK′ T
′
′
′
+ B V′
(8)
D-Att Q, K , V = Softmax √
dhead
where K′ , V′ , and B′ indicate the deformed key, value, and the
relative position bias with offsets. K′ and V′ can be obtained
by
K ′ = X′ W K ,

V′ = X′ W V

X′ = φ(X; p + 1p),

1p = δoffset (Q)

(9)

where X implies deformed input instance X, φ(·) denotes the
bilinear interpolation function, 1p expresses the learnable offsets, δoffset (·) represents the function of the offset subnetwork,
and Q = XW Q indicates the query.
As exhibited in Fig. 3, our Siamese Transformer branch
incorporates two identical DATs, each of which has four
stages. The two Swin-T blocks are located in the first two
stages, while the DAT blocks are embedded in the last two
stages. Besides, each stage contains a patch embedding layer
for converting the feature map to tokens and downsampling.
Note that there are three DAT blocks in Stage 3. Four DEMs
connect two DATs to produce the difference feature maps.
In sum, when the bitemporal HRRS images I1 ∈ R H ×W ×C and
I2 ∈ R H ×W ×C are input to the Siamese Transformer branch,
both the multilevel feature maps {(Gi1 , Gi2 ), i = 1, 2, 3, 4} and
their corresponding difference feature maps {G̃i , i = 1, 2, 3, 4}
can be achieved. Their dimensions are the same as the outputs
of the Siamese CNN branch. These features carry multiscale
global information, which is helpful for HRRS image CD.
′

C. Fusion Decoder
To generate accurate change maps, we develop the fusion
decoder in this section. As illustrated in Fig. 3, our fusion

Fig. 7.
Structure of CTFM, which involves pixel-wise add, multiply,
concatenation, max pooling, average pooling, 1 × 1 convolution, and Sigmoid
operations.

decoder consists of four CTFMs (corresponding to four stages
in the dual-branch encoder) and a simple classifier. Their
functions are to fuse local and global features from the
Siamese CNN and Siamese Transformer branches and to
produce change maps.
Four CTFMs have the same structure (see Fig. 7). For
clarity, we use the CTFM located in the third stage as an
example to explain it in detail. For F̃3 ∈ R(H/16)×(W/16)×C3
and G̃3 ∈ R(H/16)×(W/16)×C3 , CTFM first adds them together
to integrate the fine local information and global context
dependencies coarsely, and we record the summation feature
as H̃3 ∈ R(H/16)×(W/16)×C3 . Then, H̃3 would be fed into a
CAM [18] to obtain the channel-wise weight S3 , which contains a max pooling layer, an average pooling layer, an MLP
(constructed by two 1 × 1 convolutions), and a sigmoid
function. Next, CTFM would multiply S3 to F̃3 and G̃3 individually to highlight the important messages from the channel
aspects. Finally, the product results will be concatenated with
pre
feature H3 ∈ R(H/16)×(W/16)×C3 to generate the fused feature
pre
map H3 ∈ R(H/16)×(W/16)×3C3 . Here, H3 is achieved by the
upsampling operation and 1 × 1 convolution based on H4 ∈
R(H/32)×(W/32)×2C4 . The concatenation can not only combine
weighted local and global features, but also aggregate upperlevel features to complete interscale information fusion. The
above process can be generalized by the following formulas:
pre 
Hi = Concat Si F̃i , Si G̃i , Hi


Si = σ MLP Maxpool H̃i + MLP Avepool H̃i
H̃i = F̃i + G̃i ,

pre

Hi

= f Conv1×1 (Up(Hi+1 ))

(10)

where Concat(·) indicates the concatenation operation at the
channel-wise, Maxpool(·) and Avepool(·) mean the max and
average pooling layer, respectively, MLP(·) denotes the MLP
function, σ (·) implies the sigmoid function, Up(·) expresses
the upsampling, and f Conv1×1 (·) specifies the 1 × 1 convolupre
tion. Note that there is no Hi in the concatenation process in
Stage 4. Also, the upsampling in the decoder is accomplished
by the bilinear interpolation algorithm.
At the top of the encoder, a simple classifier is developed
to generate change maps. Specifically, the classifier accommodates two 3 × 3 convolutions and a softmax function.
In addition, a BN layer and a ReLU activation are added
after the first convolution layer. When the feature map H∗ ∈
R H ×W ×3C1 is fed into the classifier, the change probability
prediction P ∈ R H ×W ×2 can be obtained, where H∗ is

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: WNet: W-SHAPED HIERARCHICAL NETWORK FOR RS IMAGE CD

5615814

upsampled by H1 . Finally, the binary change map M ∈ R H ×W
is generated by argmax operation on the prediction P, where
M(i, j) = 1 indicates the changed pixels and M(i, j) =
0 implies the unchanged pixels.
Generally, the sample imbalance problem exists in CD tasks,
where the number of unchanged pixels exceeds that of changed
pixels. To mitigate this problem, we combine the cross-entropy
loss Lce and dice loss Ldice to train our WNet. For the predicted
binary change map M and the ground-truth Y, the definitions
of Lce and Ldice can be expressed as

images into 256 × 256 patches and construct the training/validation/testing sets involving 7120/1024/2048 patch
pairs.
4) Sun Yat-Sen University Dataset (SYSU-CD) [8]: SYSUCD is a large-scale CD dataset, which consists of 20 000
256 × 256 HRRS image pairs, whose spatial resolutions are
0.5 m. Notably, there are multiple change targets in the SYSUCD dataset, such as urban buildings, vegetation, and maritime
vessels. This increases the difficulty of CD. Consistent with the
common division strategy, 12 000/4000/4000 pairs are selected
to establish the training/validation/testing set, respectively.

N

1 X
Yi log Mi + (1 − Yi ) log(1 − Mi )
N i=1
PN
2 i=1
Mi Yi
(11)
Ldice = 1 − P N
i=1 (Mi + Yi ) + ϵ

Lce = −

where ϵ = 1e − 7 is set to avoid being divided by zero and
N denotes the number of pixels. In the training process, Lce
treats pixels equally and Ldice pays attention to the changed
pixels. Therefore, the combination of Lce and Ldice can balance
unchanged and changed pixels to a certain extent. Finally, the
total loss function L for our model can be formulated as

L = λ Lce + 1 − λ Ldice
(12)
where λ is a parameter that controls the specific gravity of
two loss functions.
IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Datasets Introduction
To evaluate the proposed WNet, the following four HRRS
image CD datasets are selected in this article.
1) Season-Varying CD Dataset (SVCD) [65]: SVCD comprises two sets of season-varying HRRS image pairs collected
from Google Earth. In the first set, there are seven image
pairs with the size of 4725 × 2700. Their changes reach the
demands of manual annotation. In the second set, there are
four image pairs with the size of 1900 × 1000. The changes
within them are minimal. Thus, the objects with various scales
are added by researchers to synthesize the diverse changes.
The spatial resolutions of the above 11 image pairs are varied
from 3 to 100 cm per pixel. After the preprocessing (cropping
and rotation), the final training/validation/testing sets enclose
10 000/2998/3000 pairs with the size of 256 × 256.
2) WuHan University Dataset (WHU-CD) [66]: WHU-CD
contains a pair of aerial images with a size of 32 507 × 15 354.
Their resolutions are 0.2 m per pixel. The main changes in this
dataset are buildings. Since this dataset has no unified split
rule, we cut the original aerial images into patches with a size
of 256 × 256 pixels nonoverlapped and randomly divided them
into 5947/743/744 patch pairs for training/validation/testing,
respectively.
3) LEarning, Vision, and RS (LEVIR-CD) [14]: LEVIRCD contains 637 image pairs (obtained from Google Earth)
with a size of 1024 × 1024, whose spatial resolutions are
0.5 m. These images cover over 20 regions and encompass 31 333 change instances, concentrating on the buildings. According to the original literature, we crop these

B. Experimental Settings
All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA Tesla
V100 with 32G video memory, and the compilation platform
is PyTorch. The common data augmentation schemes (e.g.,
horizontal/vertical flipping, scale cropping, and blurring) are
used in the training phase to ensure the WNet’s stability.
The dual-branch backbones of WNet are initialized by the
pretrained parameters of ResNet18 [33] and DAT-tiny [31]
using ImageNet. Other parts of our WNet are initialized
randomly. Here, the Adam optimizer with the parameters
β1 = 0.5 and β2 = 0.999 is adopted to complete the training.
The training epochs, batch size, and learning rate equal 250,
16, and 1e-4, respectively. The learning rate for the first half of
epochs remains and then would be linearly decayed. One free
parameter should be set in advance, that is, the loss control
parameter λ [see (12)]. In the following experiments, we fix
λ = 0.9 unless otherwise stated, and its influence will be
discussed in Section IV-E.
To investigate WNet’s performance clearly, we select five
assessment indicators [1], [14]: precision (Pre), recall (Rec),
intersection-of-union (IoU), F1 score, and overall accuracy
(OA). Their definitions are
TP
TP
TP
, Rec =
, IoU =
Pre =
TP + FP
TP + FN
TP + FP + FN
2 × Pre × Rec
TP + TN
F1 =
, OA =
(13)
Pre + Rec
TP + TN + FP + FN
where TP, TN, FP, and FN represent true positive, true
negative, false positive, and false negative pixels, respectively.
C. Performance of WNet
We select eight methods for comparison to evaluate the
performance of the proposed WNet, including FC-Siamconc [37], FC-Siam-diff [37], DSAMNet [8], SNUNet [43],
ISNet [49], BIT [60], SwinSUNet [56], and ICIF-Net [61].
Here, the last three are Transformer-based methods, and the
rest are CNN-based approaches. All compared methods are
completed using the codes released by the authors. Their
free parameters are set according to the original literature,
and the experimental settings are the same as mentioned in
Section IV-B.
1) Numerical Results: The quantitative results of different
models counted on four datasets are shown in Table I, where
the best values are in bold and the second-best values are
underlined. We can easily find that the proposed WNet performs best, and there are distinct performance gaps between

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ODELS C OUNTED ON F OUR DATASETS . F OR P RE , R EC , I O U, F1, AND OA VALUES (%), THE B EST VALUES ARE IN
B OLD , AND THE S ECOND -B EST VALUES ARE U NDERLINED

Fig. 8. Different change maps of four bitemporal HRRS image pairs that are randomly selected from the SVCD dataset. Here, white, black, green, and red
denote TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels, respectively. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Ground truth. (d) FC-Siam-conc. (e) FC-Siam-diff. (f) DSAMNet. (g) SNUNet.
(h) ISNet. (i) BIT. (j) SwinSUNet. (k) ICIFNet. (l) WNet (ours).

our WNet and the second-best models in most cases. Taking SVCD as an example, the improvements achieved by
WNet in F1 scores are 21.33% (over FC-Siam-conc), 22.20%
(over FC-Siam-diff), 4.89% (over DSAMNet), 2.17% (over
SNUNet), 2.76% (over ISNet), 2.69% (over BIT), 2.30% (over
SwinSUNet), and 2.51% (over ICIF-Net). Taking WHU-CD
as another example, the enhancements achieved by WNet in
IoU are 44.26% (over FC-Siam-conc), 41.91% (over FC-Siamdiff), 9.13% (over DSAMNet), 5.06% (over SNUNet), 6.04%
(over ISNet), 4.56% (over BIT), 3.97% (over SwinSUNet),
and 1.63% (over ICIF-Net). An encouraging investigation is
that the behavior of WNet is stable for different datasets.
For instance, SNUNet’s performance is suitable for SVCD,
LEVIR-CD, and SYSU-CD. However, its behavior for WHUCD is not as good as expected. For another instance, ICIF-Net
performs well for WHU-CD. However, its behavior is relatively weaker for the other three datasets. Compared to other
methods, the proposed WNet can achieve satisfactory results
for all datasets, which demonstrates the generalization ability
of our model.
The above observations illustrate the effectiveness of WNet
from various aspects. The reasons for these positive results
are threefold. First, both CNN and Transformer’s advantages
are leveraged in WNet, which is beneficial for exploring the
local and global information hidden in HRRS images. Second,
the developed DEM can highlight the change areas between

bitemporal images. Along with the multiscale scheme, sufficient and diverse changed clues can be mined for the final CD.
Third, the designed CTFM can fully fuse the local knowledge
and global contexts, which ensures the quality of change maps.
Although WNet’s behavior is assertive, we cannot neglect
that its performance in Pre is not optimal for LEVIR-CD
and SYSU-CD. This is because the embedded deformable
ideas make WNet focuses on the changing objects of interest,
resulting in the final change maps having relatively more FP
and fewer FN pixels. Fortunately, our Pre values are still in a
reasonable range.
2) Visual Results: The examples of change maps achieved
by different methods are displayed in Figs. 8–11, where white,
black, green, and red represent TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels,
respectively. By investigating these visual results, we can get
the following conclusions.
1) WNet can effectively mitigate the negative impacts of
various environmental conditions on CD. First, as shown
in the first and third rows of Fig. 8, WNet can detect
changes of interest under seasonal variation, such as
white buildings that are similar in color to snow. Instead,
the detection results of other methods, such as DSAMNet, are not good enough (see red areas). Second, in the
first and fourth rows of Fig. 9, WNet can distinguish
the buildings with a similar color appearance, while
other methods are missing these areas. Third, WNet can

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: WNet: W-SHAPED HIERARCHICAL NETWORK FOR RS IMAGE CD

5615814

Fig. 9. Different change maps of four bitemporal HRRS image pairs that are randomly selected from the WHU-CD dataset. Here, white, black, green,
and red denote TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels, respectively. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Ground truth. (d) FC-Siam-conc. (e) FC-Siam-diff. (f) DSAMNet.
(g) SNUNet. (h) ISNet. (i) BIT. (j) SwinSUNet. (k) ICIFNet. (l) WNet (ours).

Fig. 10. Different change maps of four bitemporal HRRS image pairs that are randomly selected from the LEVIR-CD dataset. Here, white, black, green,
and red denote TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels, respectively. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) ground truth. (d) FC-Siam-conc. (e) FC-Siam-diff. (f) DSAMNet.
(g) SNUNet. (h) ISNet. (i) BIT. (j) SwinSUNet. (k) ICIFNet. (l) WNet (ours).

Fig. 11. Different change maps of four bitemporal HRRS image pairs that are randomly selected from the SYSU-CD dataset. Here, white, black, green,
and red denote TP, TN, FP, and FN pixels, respectively. (a) T1 image. (b) T2 image. (c) Ground truth. (d) FC-Siam-conc. (e) FC-Siam-diff. (f) DSAMNet.
(g) SNUNet. (h) ISNet. (i) BIT. (j) SwinSUNet. (k) ICIFNet. (l) WNet (ours).

generate high-quality change maps (which are close to
the ground truth) under different lighting conditions (see
the third line of Fig. 10). On the contrary, the change
maps of other methods all have a large number of FP
or FN pixels.

2) WNet can effectively identify both large-scale and finegrained changes with different resolutions. As illustrated
in the third and fourth lines of Fig. 8(l), apart from
detecting large building structures, the changes in small
targets (such as vehicles and trees) can also be detected

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF M ODEL E FFICIENCY W ITH THE PARAMETER
S IZE (PARAM ) AND FLOP S

by our WNet. Other methods perform unsatisfactorily
in small targets, resulting in many FN pixels (in red).
Similarly, the fourth line of Fig. 9 also demonstrates
that WNet can deal with both large and small changes.
In this pair of examples, only WNet has detected the
disappearance of the white shed in the T1 image.
3) WNet can effectively detect changes in complex geographical environments. SYSU-CD is a dataset with
multiple complex targets and backgrounds, including
buildings, trees, ship targets, land, vegetation, and ocean
(see Fig. 11). Benefiting from the Siamese CNN and
Siamese Transformer branches, both the detailed local
information and the global context knowledge can be
mined by WNet. Thus, compared to other models, WNet
can produce better change maps with fewer red and
green pixels.
3) Model Complexity: Apart from numerical and visual
results, we also count the parameter size (Param) and floatingpoint operations (FLOPs) of WNet and other models. Note
that the input data sizes are 3 × 256 × 256 when we
estimate FLOPs. The results are displayed in Table II. By analyzing them, we can find that the parameter sizes of the
Transformer-based models are larger than that of the CNNbased methods due to the self-attention mechanism in the
Transformer. Furthermore, WNet is the heaviest one among all
models. This is because there are two dual-branch networks in
its encoder, which leads to a large number of parameters to be
trained. Fortunately, owing to the simplicity of structure and
module design, WNet’s FLOPs are lower than some complex
methods (e.g., DSAMNet, SNUNet, and ICIF-Net). In sum,
our model’s parameter size and FLOPs stay in an acceptable
range. Developing the lightweight version is one of our further
works.
D. Ablation Studies
This section studies each part of WNet from the following four aspects. First, the contributions of the proposed
D-Residual block are discussed. Then, we investigate if the
dual-Siamese structure helps CD or not. Next, the rationality
of choosing DAT as the backbone of our Siamese Transformer

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDIES OF THE D UAL -S IAMESE B RANCH S TRUCTURE AND
I TS C OMPONENTS . T HE B EST I O U AND F1 VALUES (%) ARE IN B OLD

is inspected. Finally, the effectiveness of the proposed DEM
and CTFM will be studied. Here, we only count the IoU and
F1 values of different models for clarity. Also, experimental
settings and free parameters are set according to the contents
mentioned in Section IV-B. Note that the bitemporal difference
feature generation (in the encoding stage) and dual-branch feature fusion (in the decoding stage) are completed through the
channel dimension concatenation for the first three scenarios.
1) Effectiveness of D-Residual Block: The D-Residual
block aims to alleviate the limitations of exploring HRRS
images with regular convolutional kernels by introducing
deformable convolution. To demonstrate its effectiveness,
we construct two simple HRRS image CD networks.
Net-0: Only Siamese CNN branch (Residual block).
Net-1: Only Siamese CNN branch (D-Residual block).
Net-0 means there is a Siamese network with two normal
ResNet18 [33]. Net-1 indicates that the normal residual blocks
within ResNet18 are replaced by the D-Residual blocks.
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the difference
feature maps and feature fusion results are produced by the
channel-wise concatenation. The IoU and F1 values of the
two networks are shown in Table III(a). Obviously, Net-1
outperforms Net-0 in all cases. This illustrates that the DResidual block is helpful in mining valuable information from
HRRS images for CD tasks.
2) Effectiveness of Dual-Siamese Branch: As mentioned
in Section III-B, the dual-Siamese branch encoder plays an

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: WNet: W-SHAPED HIERARCHICAL NETWORK FOR RS IMAGE CD

5615814

essential role in our WNet. To verify if the dual-Siamese
structure performs better than the single Siamese branch
structure, we design the following three networks.
Net-1: Only Siamese CNN branch (D-residual block).
Net-2: Only Siamese transformer branch (DAT).
Net-3: Dual-Siamese branch (Net-1 + Net-2).
Net-1 and Net-2 imply that the CD network only contains
a Siamese CNN encoder or a Siamese Transformer encoder.
Net-3 denotes that the encoder involves a Siamese CNN and a
Siamese Transformer in parallel. Similar to the first scenario,
the channel-wise concatenation also completes the difference
feature generation and different branch feature fusion steps.
The IoU and F1 values of three networks counted on four
datasets are exhibited in Table III(b).
From the observation of numerical results, we can find that
the performance of Net-2 is better than that of Net-1 in the
SVCD and WHU-CD datasets, and the behavior of Net-1 is
stronger than that of Net-2 in the LEVIR-CD and SYSU-CD
datasets. Also, the performance gaps between Net-1 and Net-2
in SVCD and WHU-CD are higher than that in LEVIR-CD
and SYSU-CD. These observations imply that the Transformer
is more suitable for the current HRRS image CD datasets.
When we combine them (i.e., Net-3), the CD results counted
on different datasets are improved to a large degree. This
illustrates that the dual-Siamese branch structure is conducive
to CD tasks since local and global information can be explored
for generating change maps.
3) Influence of Different Transformers: As discussed in
Section III-B3, DAT [31] is the backbone of our Siamese
Transformer branch. To study whether this choice is suitable,
we select five other popular Transformers and construct five
new networks.
Net-4: Dual-Siamese branch (Net-1 + Swin-T).
Net-5: Dual-Siamese branch (Net-1 + PVT).
Net-6: Dual-Siamese branch (Net-1 + SegFormer).
Net-7: Dual-Siamese branch (Net-1 + MPViT).
Net-8: Dual-Siamese branch (Net-1 + BiFormer).
Net-4, Net-5, Net-6, Net-7, and Net-8 indicate that we use
Swin-T [59], PVT [67], SegFormer [52], MPViT [53], and
BiFormer [54] to replace DAT in Net-3. These Transformers are all operated downstream based on strictly gridpartitioned patches. Here, the Transformers are initialized
by the pretrained parameters of Swin-tiny [59], PVTv2B1 [67], SegFormer-B1 [52], MPViT-tiny [53], and BiFormertiny [54]. These five networks’ performance is summarized
in Table III(c), and Net-3’s results are also exhibited for
reference. By analyzing the results, it is easy for us to find
that Net-3 (embedded by DAT) achieves better performance
than all other Nets for all datasets. The reason behind this is
that DAT can effectively alleviate information loss caused by
strict grid division and improve CD accuracy. This observation
confirms that choosing DAT as the backbone of the Siamese
Transformer branch is suitable.
4) Effectiveness of Different Modules: After studying the
D-Residual block, dual-Siamese structure, and DAT’s functions, the other two important components of WNet (i.e., DEM
and CTFM) will be discussed here. DEM is used to generate

difference feature maps and enhance change information,
while CTFM is used to fuse local, global, and cross-scale
knowledge. To certify the usefulness of DEM and CTFM,
we construct the following two networks based on Net-3.
Net-9: Dual-Siamese branch + DEM (Net-3 + DEM).
Net-10: Proposed WNet (Net-9 + CTFM).
Net-9 means that we add DEM into Net-3 to ensure the quality
of generated difference feature maps. Net-10 is actually our
WNet. These two networks and Net-3’s performance counted
on four HRRS image CD datasets are shown in Table III(d).
Compared with Net-3, the improvements achieved
by Net-9 in IoU/F1 scores are 0.33%/0.17% (SVCD),
1.29%/0.77% (WHU-CD), 0.87%/0.53% (LEVIR-CD),
and 3.95%/2.92% (SYSU-CD). Compared with Net-9,
the enhancements obtained by Net-10 in two assessment
criteria are 0.28%/0.15% (SVCD), 0.46%/0.27% (WHU-CD),
0.76%/0.45% (LEVIR-CD), and 0.64%/0.46% (SYSU-CD).
The above findings illustrate that DEM and CTFM play
positive roles in our WNet.
5) Effectiveness of Integration of CNNs and Transformers:
As mentioned in Section I, one of the motivations of this
work is to integrate the advantages of CNNs and Transformers.
To confirm whether this integration is proper, we construct the
following networks.
Net-11: Two Siamese CNN branches + DEM + CTFM.
Net-12: Two Siamese Transformer branches + DEM +
CTFM.
Net-11 and Net-12 denote the dual-Siamese branch encoder
composed of two Siamese CNNs and two Siamese Transformers, respectively. All of them are embedded with DEMs.
Besides, the fusion decoders consisting of fusion modules are
added after the encoders. Their IoU and F1 values counted on
four datasets are exhibited in Table III(e), and the results of
our WNet (i.e., Net-10) are also exhibited for reference.
By observing the results, we can easily find that Net-10
outperforms the other two nets in all cases. Taking SVCD
as an example, the enhancements achieved by Net-10 in IoU
value are 2.08% (Net-11) and 1.02% (Net-12). Taking SYSUCD as another instance, the improvements obtained by Net-10
in F1 value are 1.03% (Net-11) and 3.07% (Net-12). These
positive results demonstrate that the combination of CNNs and
Transformers is conducive to finding the change information
hidden in bitemporal HRRS images.
E. Paramter Analysis
There is a free parameter in our WNet, that is, the weight
λ controlling the contributions of the two terms of (12).
In this section, we will study its influence on our model.
To this end, we change its value from 0.1 to 1.0 with an
interval of 0.1. Then, various WNets can be obtained based on
different λ , and their F1 values counted on four datasets are
exhibited in Fig. 12. By observing these figures, we can find
the following points. First, different WNets’ behavior becomes
stronger when λ values are increased from 0.1 to 0.9. Also,
the peak values appear at λ = 0.9 coincidentally. This implies
that the cross-entropy loss Lce is relatively more important.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 12.

F1 scores of different WNets based on different λ , which are counted on four datasets. (a) SVCD. (b) WHU-CD. (c) LEVIR-CD. (d) SYSU-CD.

However, the performance of WNets is whittled down distinctly when λ = 1.0, which points out that the dice loss Ldice
is indispensable. Second, the performance of different WNets
is stable for SVCD and LEVIR-CD. Nevertheless, for WHUCD and SYSU-CD, their behavior changes are apparent. This
is mainly because the distributions of the change instances
are different. Fortunately, all behavioral changes are within a
reasonable range. Based on the above discussion, the optimal
value of λ is 0.9. Also, we suggest to the readers that they can
tune this parameter around 0.9 when they apply our WNet to
new data.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes a dual-Siamese branch hierarchical
network (i.e., WNet) for HRRS image CD. WNet is composed
of a dual-Siamese branch encoder and a fusion decoder. The
encoder encloses a Siamese CNN and Siamese Transformer
in parallel. Each has four stages, which aim to extract diverse
local information and global long-range context dependencies
from bitemporal HRRS images. We also introduce deformable
convolution and attention into the Siamese CNN and Siamese
Transformer to enhance the usefulness of the obtained knowledge. In this fashion, WNet will have more flexible receptive
fields to understand the diverse spatial areas within HRRS
images so that the information quantity of the generated
features can be ensured. Meanwhile, the simple, yet effective
DEM is developed to highlight interest changes. Through
straightforward pixel-wise subtraction and channel dimension
concatenation, DEM can emphasize the changes of interest
and suppress the irrelevant changes in a learnable manner.
After adding DEMs to different stages of WNet’s encoder, the
discriminative difference feature maps can be produced. The
fusion decoder consists of CTFMs and a classifier. CTFM is
developed based on CAM, focusing on fusing local, global,
and cross-level clues at different stages. The classifier is
constructed to predict change maps, which encompasses two
convolution layers and a softmax function. The encouraging
numerical and visual results counted on four public HRRS
image CD datasets demonstrate that our WNet performs better
than many existing methods. Although WNet’s behavior is
satisfactory, its parameter size is relatively large due to the
dual-Siamese branch structure. In the future, we will pay attention to lightening WNet while maintaining its performance.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Tang et al., “An unsupervised remote sensing change detection
method based on multiscale graph convolutional network and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5609715.
[2] L. Li et al., “Competition between biogeochemical drivers and landcover changes determines urban greening or browning,” Remote Sens.
Environ., vol. 287, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 113481.

[3] N. Wang, W. Li, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Graph-based block-level urban
change detection using Sentinel-2 time series,” Remote Sens. Environ.,
vol. 274, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 112993.
[4] Z. Zheng, Y. Zhong, J. Wang, A. Ma, and L. Zhang, “Building damage
assessment for rapid disaster response with a deep object-based semantic
change detection framework: From natural disasters to man-made disasters,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 265, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 112636.
[5] E. L. Bullock et al., “Timeliness in forest change monitoring: A new
assessment framework demonstrated using Sentinel-1 and a continuous
change detection algorithm,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 276, Jul. 2022,
Art. no. 113043.
[6] D. Wen et al., “Change detection from very-high-spatial-resolution optical remote sensing images: Methods, applications, and future directions,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 68–101, Dec. 2021.
[7] X. Zhang, S. Cheng, L. Wang, and H. Li, “Asymmetric cross-attention
hierarchical network based on CNN and transformer for bitemporal
remote sensing images change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 2000415.
[8] Q. Shi, M. Liu, S. Li, X. Liu, F. Wang, and L. Zhang, “A deeply
supervised attention metric-based network and an open aerial image
dataset for remote sensing change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5604816.
[9] X. Tang et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on 3-D
octave convolution with spatial–spectral attention network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2430–2447, Mar. 2021.
[10] C. Liu, J. Ma, X. Tang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Deep hash
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3420–3443, Apr. 2021.
[11] X. Tang, Q. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Ma, and L. Jiao, “Attention
consistent network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 2030–2045, 2021.
[12] Y. Yang, X. Tang, Y.-M. Cheung, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “SAGN:
Semantic-aware graph network for remote sensing scene classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1011–1025, 2023.
[13] L. Mou, L. Bruzzone, and X. X. Zhu, “Learning spectral–spatial–
temporal features via a recurrent convolutional neural network for
change detection in multispectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 924–935, Feb. 2019.
[14] H. Chen and Z. Shi, “A spatial–temporal attention-based method and a
new dataset for remote sensing image change detection,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1662, May 2020.
[15] W. Shi, M. Zhang, H. Ke, X. Fang, Z. Zhan, and S. Chen, “Landslide
recognition by deep convolutional neural network and change detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 4654–4672,
Jun. 2021.
[16] J. Chen et al., “DASNet: Dual attentive fully convolutional Siamese
networks for change detection in high-resolution satellite images,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 1194–1206,
2021.
[17] Z. Zheng, Y. Wan, Y. Zhang, S. Xiang, D. Peng, and B. Zhang, “CLNet:
Cross-layer convolutional neural network for change detection in optical
remote sensing imagery,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 175,
pp. 247–267, May 2021.
[18] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[19] Z. Qin, P. Zhang, F. Wu, and X. Li, “FcaNet: Frequency channel
attention networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 763–772.
[20] X. Peng, R. Zhong, Z. Li, and Q. Li, “Optical remote sensing image
change detection based on attention mechanism and image difference,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 7296–7307,
Sep. 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANG et al.: WNet: W-SHAPED HIERARCHICAL NETWORK FOR RS IMAGE CD

5615814

[21] H. Zheng et al., “HFA-Net: High frequency attention Siamese network
for building change detection in VHR remote sensing images,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 129, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 108717.
[22] L. Wan, Y. Tian, W. Kang, and L. Ma, “D-TNet: Category-awareness
based difference-threshold alternative learning network for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5633316.
[23] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[24] L. B. A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2021, pp. 1–22.
[25] W. Wang, X. Tan, P. Zhang, and X. Wang, “A CBAM based multiscale
transformer fusion approach for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 6817–6825, 2022.
[26] Q. Li, R. Zhong, X. Du, and Y. Du, “TransUNetCD: A hybrid
transformer network for change detection in optical remote-sensing
images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5622519.
[27] M. Liu, Q. Shi, J. Li, and Z. Chai, “Learning token-aligned
representations with multimodel transformers for different-resolution
change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 4413013.
[28] J. Yuan, L. Wang, and S. Cheng, “STransUNet: A Siamese TransUNetbased remote sensing image change detection network,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 9241–9253, 2022.
[29] J. Dai et al., “Deformable convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 764–773.
[30] X. Zhu, H. Hu, S. Lin, and J. Dai, “Deformable ConvNets v2: More
deformable, better results,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9300–9308.
[31] Z. Xia, X. Pan, S. Song, L. E. Li, and G. Huang, “Vision transformer
with deformable attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 4784–4793.
[32] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[34] L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and B. Du, “Deep learning for remote sensing data:
A technical tutorial on the state of the art,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.
Mag., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 22–40, Jun. 2016.
[35] X. X. Zhu et al., “Deep learning in remote sensing: A comprehensive
review and list of resources,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 8–36, Dec. 2017.
[36] L. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ye, G. Yin, and B. A. Johnson,
“Deep learning in remote sensing applications: A meta-analysis and
review,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 152, pp. 166–177,
Jun. 2019.
[37] R. C. Daudt, B. Le Saux, and A. Boulch, “Fully convolutional Siamese
networks for change detection,” in Proc. 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Image
Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2018, pp. 4063–4067.
[38] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI. Munich, Germany:
Springer, Oct. 2015, pp. 234–241.
[39] D. Peng, Y. Zhang, and H. Guan, “End-to-end change detection for high
resolution satellite images using improved UNet++,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 11, no. 11, p. 1382, Jun. 2019.
[40] H. Chen, C. Wu, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Change detection
in multisource VHR images via deep Siamese convolutional multiplelayers recurrent neural network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2848–2864, Apr. 2020.
[41] H. Zhang, M. Lin, G. Yang, and L. Zhang, “ESCNet: An end-to-end
superpixel-enhanced change detection network for very-high-resolution
remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 28–42, Jan. 2023.
[42] M. Zhang and W. Shi, “A feature difference convolutional neural
network-based change detection method,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 7232–7246, Oct. 2020.
[43] S. Fang, K. Li, J. Shao, and Z. Li, “SNUNet-CD: A densely connected
Siamese network for change detection of VHR images,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.

[44] Z. Li, C. Yan, Y. Sun, and Q. Xin, “A densely attentive refinement
network for change detection based on very-high-resolution bitemporal
remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 4409818.
[45] Y. Feng, J. Jiang, H. Xu, and J. Zheng, “Change detection on remote
sensing images using dual-branch multilevel intertemporal network,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4401015.
[46] Z. Niu, G. Zhong, and H. Yu, “A review on the attention mechanism of
deep learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 452, pp. 48–62, Sep. 2021.
[47] B. Bai, W. Fu, T. Lu, and S. Li, “Edge-guided recurrent convolutional neural network for multitemporal remote sensing image building
change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5610613.
[48] J. Lei, Y. Gu, W. Xie, Y. Li, and Q. Du, “Boundary extraction constrained
Siamese network for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5621613.
[49] G. Cheng, G. Wang, and J. Han, “ISNet: Towards improving separability
for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5623811.
[50] K. Han et al., “A survey on vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–110, Jan. 2023.
[51] S. Khan, M. Naseer, M. Hayat, S. W. Zamir, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah,
“Transformers in vision: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 10s,
pp. 1–41, Jan. 2022.
[52] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo,
“SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with
transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021,
pp. 12077–12090.
[53] Y. Lee, J. Kim, J. Willette, and S. J. Hwang, “MPViT: Multi-path vision
transformer for dense prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7277–7286.
[54] L. Zhu, X. Wang, Z. Ke, W. Zhang, and R. W. Lau, “BiFormer: Vision
transformer with bi-level routing attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 10323–10333.
[55] W. G. C. Bandara and V. M. Patel, “A transformer-based Siamese
network for change detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens.
Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 207–210.
[56] C. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Cheng, and Y. Li, “SwinSUNet: Pure transformer
network for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5224713.
[57] T. Yan, Z. Wan, and P. Zhang, “Fully transformer network for change
detection of remote sensing images,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2022, pp. 1691–1708.
[58] W. Wang et al., “Pyramid vision transformer: A versatile backbone for
dense prediction without convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 548–558.
[59] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.
[60] H. Chen, Z. Qi, and Z. Shi, “Remote sensing image change detection
with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5607514.
[61] Y. Feng, H. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Liu, and J. Zheng, “ICIF-Net: Intra-scale
cross-interaction and inter-scale feature fusion network for bitemporal
remote sensing images change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4410213.
[62] L. Song, M. Xia, L. Weng, H. Lin, M. Qian, and B. Chen, “Axial
cross attention meets CNN: Bibranch fusion network for change detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16,
pp. 32–43, 2023.
[63] D. Song, Y. Dong, and X. Li, “Context and difference enhancement
network for change detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 9457–9467, 2022.
[64] S. W. Zamir, A. Arora, S. Khan, M. Hayat, F. S. Khan, and M. Yang,
“Restormer: Efficient transformer for high-resolution image restoration,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 5718–5729.
[65] M. A. Lebedev, Y. V. Vizilter, O. V. Vygolov, V. A. Knyaz, and
A. Y. Rubis, “Change detection in remote sensing images using conditional adversarial networks,” Int. Arch. Photogramm., Remote Sens.
Spatial Inf. Sci., vol. 42, pp. 565–571, May 2018.
[66] S. Ji, S. Wei, and M. Lu, “Fully convolutional networks for multisource
building extraction from an open aerial and satellite imagery data
set,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 574–586,
Jan. 2019.
[67] W. Wang et al., “PVT v2: Improved baselines with pyramid vision
transformer,” Comput. Vis. Media, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 415–424, Sep. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5615814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuits
and systems from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery with the University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. His research interests include remote-sensing
image content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing,
remote-sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details,
refer https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/.

Tianxiang Zhang received the B.E. degree in electronic and information engineering from Xidian
University, Xi’an, China, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in electronic and
information engineering with the Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of
the Ministry of Education.
His research interests include image understanding, remote-sensing image change detection, and
deep learning.

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include computational
intelligence and image understanding.

Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is a Professor with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education, Xidian
University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine learning, and remote-sensing image analysis and understanding.
Fang Liu (Member, IEEE) was born in China,
in 1990. She received the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Henan University,
Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in
intelligent information processing from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. Her research interests include deep
learning, object detection, polarimetric SAR image
classification, and change detection.
Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of the Ministry of Education of China, Xi’an. He has
authored or coauthored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests
include signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory,
wavelet theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is a member of the IEEE Xi’an Section Executive Committee and an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of
Artificial Intelligence. He is also the Chairperson of the Awards and
Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 16,2026 at 05:56:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

